---
year: 2010.0
project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
project: Dabinet
page_from: 17.0
page_to: 20.0
project_label: Solomon (formerly Dabinet)
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2010_17_20.md
---
Team Responsible

Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Programme Support Function

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Capability Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance

Number of Projects / Increments 2

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision

-   Dabinett Programme Support Office

-   Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration & Management project

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The Department requires an effective and efficient end-to-end Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance service. This will provide actionable information and intelligence to inform decision makers through a capability that is interoperable in a joint, inter-agency, and multinational environment, in support of an agreed range of Military Tasks out to 2035. The Department identified capability gaps in two areas: Direct, Process and Disseminate relating to the integrated delivery of Intelligence; and Deep and Persistent relating to collection of intelligence. The Dabinett Programme was established in order to address these capability gaps and in doing so to significantly improve the efficiency, effectiveness, quality and timeliness of intelligence delivered to the commander primarily by making better use of legacy systems but also through the introduction of new capability across all the Defence Lines of Development.

Background

Dabinett was originally scoped as a replacement to the Canberra PR9 aircraft used for tactical reconnaissance and photographic mapping. In 2005 the Acquisition for Network Enabled Capability and Dabinett Programme Integrated Project Team was formed to deliver the project. Lessons identified from theatre at this time, continued to focus on the inefficient use of the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance inventory. Furthermore, analysis from operations in Iraq indicated that information was already available to answer 80- 90%
of the collection requirements raised. This led to more emphasis being placed on Dabinett to improve the Intelligence,

Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance process, Direct, Collect, Process and Disseminate rather than merely replacing a tactical reconnaissance and photographic mapping aircraft.

In March 2010 Dabinett was renamed Solomon.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>The Programme is in a continuous Assessment Phase that will initiate a number of projects, with their own lifecycles, over three phases to deliver over time the full capability identified for Dabinett. The first of these projects is the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp; Management project which is currently in its Assessment Phase. A Through Life Capability Management approach is being used to manage the Dabinett Programme. Programme Support The £8M over four years allocated to the Dabinett Programme continuous Assessment Phase element has been used to provide technical support to the programme such as:
<ol type="a">
<li>Undertaking benefits analysis of the programme.</li>
<li>Undertaking effectiveness modelling to support the programme.</li>
<li>Supporting Programme Planning/Optimisation through Capability and Programme</li>
</ol></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Investigations.

## A.3. Progress

Dabinett is currently planned to deliver over three phases.

Phase 1

The Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &

Management project is the only project in Phase 1 of the Programme. It passed Initial Gate in April 2009. In February 2010 two competitive Assessment Phase contracts were placed with preferred bidder selection expected in late 2010.

Phase 2

Phase 2 will provide common Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance enabling services, and implement improvements to Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance information integration, Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance management, and intelligence processing. In February 2010 a decision was taken by the Direct Process and Disseminate Programme Board to divert planned resources from this phase to an Urgent Operational Requirement and other higher priority tasks. This lead to a Capability management measure to defer funding for Phase 2 by two years. This has provided an opportunity to re-plan Phases 2 and 3. This re-planning is expected to complete by December 2010.

Phase 3

The Deep and Persistent element of Dabinett, previously planned for Phase 3, has been split out from the Direct Process and Disseminate element and will form part of the Air Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance programme. Phase 3 of Dabinett will therefore only consist of the technology refresh activities.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The focus of the Dabinett Programme is on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the

Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance processes and capabilities. Without Dabinett, assets that collect intelligence will continue to be tasked to answer requests for Information and Intelligence that already exist within the intelligence community. Dabinett will meet the deconfliction and prioritisation shortfalls of the current UK Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance capability.

The delivery of an enhanced End to End UK Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance capability is fundamental to the success of future military operations. Information and intelligence is essential in all aspects of modern operations and thus provides the bedrock for decision making. Dabinett will ensure that information and intelligence is effectively and efficiently available for exploitation at all levels of command.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>A secure and coherent information infrastructure for Defence</td>
<td>
Defence Information Infrastructure (Future) Increment 2c
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 5%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="6">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Description</td>
<td colspan="3">Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Technical support to the Dabinett Continuous Assessment Phase.</td>
<td colspan="3">
Tasks competed through Framework Agreement for Technical Support, a pan-Government arrangement to enable fast and efficient procurement of technical support
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp; Management Competitive Assessment Phase</td>
<td colspan="3">
Competitive Procurement
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td colspan="2">
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Dabinett Continuous Assessment Phase (Programme Support Office costs for the first four years)</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp;
Management Competitive Assessment</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Lowest Forecast /
Approved</th>
<th>
Budgeted For

(Post-Main Investment Decision

Projects only)
</th>
<th>Highest Forecast /
Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp; Management Project</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dabinett Phases 2 and 3</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – not applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost – not applicable

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 48%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2009
</th>
<th>
In-year expenditure
</th>
<th>
Total expenditure to 31 March 2010
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase (£m)</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure (£m)</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Dabinett Continuous Assessment Phase (Programme Support Office costs for the first four years)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>Continuous<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Phase 1 - Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp; Management Project</td>
<td>December 2010</td>
<td>April 2009</td>
<td>17</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Approved for the first four years<a href="fnref1"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Earliest

Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Phase 1 - Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp;
Management Project</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td>
21
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Phase 2 and 3 are being re-planned</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – not applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – not applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures – not applicable

## D.2. Performance against Defence Lines of Development – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures – not applicable
