---
year: 2007.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: JOINT COMBAT AIRCRAFT (JCA)
page_from: 77.0
page_to: 84.0
project_label: Joint Combat Aircraft (Lightning II)
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2007_77_84.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

JOINT COMBAT

AIRCRAFT (JCA)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

JOINT COMBAT AIRCRAFT

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Carrier Strike

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Following UK participation in the Concept Demonstration Phase of the programme, the US Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) was selected to meet the JCA requirement. The Strategic Defence Review confirmed this requirement to provide the Joint Force 2000 (joint command for Harrier Forces) with a multi-role fighter/attack aircraft to replace the Royal Navy Sea Harrier and the Royal Air Force Harrier GR7/9. A tailored Main Gate Demonstration approval was obtained in January 2001 for participation in the System Development and Demonstration (SDD) phase to the value of £1.3bn, along with £600m for related non-SDD work, leading to signature that month by UK and US governments of the SDD Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). The selection of Lockheed Martin as the JSF air system prime contractor included a teaming agreement with Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems to collectively form Team JSF. Two separate and competitive propulsion contracts were awarded to Pratt and Witney for the F135 engine and GE/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team for the F136 engine. Whilst other partners joined the programme at Level 2 and 3 entry arrangements, only US and UK requirements drive the SDD baseline solution.

In September 2002 the UK selected the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing (STOVL) JSF variant to meet our requirement. A review of the JSF Programme and the viability of the STOVL design was completed in January 2005 and concluded that a successful programme of weight reduction initiatives and other performance enhancements had restored confidence that the STOVL design should remain the UK’s planning assumption. A further review by the Investment Approvals Board (IAB) in July 2006 confirmed this decision.

On 12 December 2006 Minister of State for Defence Equipment and Support signed the Production Sustainment and Follow-on Development MoU, reporting of this phase will commence in MPR09 when the UK plan to purchase the first aircraft, allowing the UK to continue to influence all aspects of the JSF programme as it moves into a new phase.

The flight test programme commenced on 15 December 2006 with the successful first flight of the first Conventional Take-Off and Land (CTOL) aircraft. The first STOVL aircraft is currently planned to fly in Summer 2008. Continued participation in the JSF programme will deliver a Block 3 aircraft with Air-to-Air and Air-to-Ground capabilities to the UK.

Two Key User Requirements (KUR) remain at risk:

KUR04 - Mission Performance: In July 2006 the IAB directed that Ship-borne Rolling and Vertical Landing (SRVL) should be included in future development of the JCA design to mitigate the risk to the Vertical Land Bring Back capability.

KUR06 – Logistic Footprint: Performance remains marginally better than requirement, although due to very narrow margin this KUR remains at risk. Work is ongoing with Lockheed Martin to drive down Logistic Footprint to ensure it remains within specification as the air system matures throughout the SDD phase.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Initial Gate Requirement</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Aircraft Carrier
</td>
<td>The ISD for this project will be set when it

achieves its Main Gate

approval</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Lockheed Martin (LM)
</td>
<td>
System Development and Demonstration
</td>
<td>Cost plus award fee, subject to a maximum price.</td>
<td>
Competitive International collaboration

procurement. UK participation through MOU agreement. (Note: the contract is placed by the US DoD with LM.)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
1858
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
2236
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-378
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-58
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>-12</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>The IPT conducted a review of the project work schedule which has given the team sufficient certainty to include more accurate accruals for the duration of the project (-£10m). Accounting Adjustment made in MPR06 now reflected in re-profiling of programme (-£2m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>-90</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Re-assessment of UK National Work - attributable cost which include: UK integration costs: (-£94m), Block 3 weapons adjusted to reflect the latest costing from Prime contractor (+£7m), Safety Case now defined to prepare for contract placement in 2007/08 (+£11m) and re-assessment of risk provision (-£87m). Break out from re-assessment from risk provision above which are: UK basing integration &amp; testing (+£5m), Identification of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation costs (+£26m). Outturn for 2006/07 versus Forecast (-£6m). Increase in Cost of Capital Charge resulting from change of planning assumption on delivery of Intangible assets (+£48m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>-11</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>Exchange rate against profile until 2013 (-£11m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>+55</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Re-alignment of programme now included in Development - Shipborne Rolling and Vertical Landing (+£55m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+24</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Interest on capital correction (MPR02 +£46m; MPR03 -£12m). New Defence Procurement Agency (DPA) requirement to include Price Forecasting Group costs within the equipment plan (+£1m).</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Additional interest on capital from new DPA IT accrual methodology (+£1m). Accounting reclassification of feasibility studies (-£2m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£16m). MPR05: Re profiling of UK specific tasks (+£3m). Adjustment of treatment of Cost of Capital Charges calculation (+£1m). MPR06: Change of accounting treatment for SDD contributions. (+£19m) re-profile of 2005/06 accrual into later years. (-£18m) removal of 2005/06 accrual. Reconciliation of accrual (+£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+376</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Adjustment for realism in the cost of the UK non-SDD work resulting from a deeper review of the estimates originally provided by the US (+£43m). Fewer UK studies than originally planned (MPR02 -£1m; MPR03 (-£6m). Costs benefits gained from use of existing ASRAAM stocks for JCA trials (-£6m). Fewer weapon studies undertaken in year (-£1m). Improved project support strategy (-£3m). Better understanding of the integrated nature and requirements of the aircraft systems (+£384m). MPR05: Reassessment of Dstl &amp; QinetiQ tasking (-£10m). Correction of contingency estimates due to weight risks in MPR04 (-£15m). MPR06: Re-profile of UK National Work to mitigate increase in Exchange Rate. Main Drivers are Interoperability (-£1m), Capital Studies (-£1m), UK IHMDS (-£1m) and CVF Integration (-£3m). Re-profile of later years Follow on Development (-£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-499</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>Reviews of the external missile systems for JCA resulted in the removal of the requirement for integrating externally mounted Brimstone (-£41m) and ASRAAM (-£49m), and Paveway II and III (-£1m) capabilities. Further UK participation in the Joint Integrated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>Variation (£m)</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Test Force to reflect UK acceptance into service strategy (+£20m). MPR05: Provision for Alternate Helmet Mounted Display System removed (-£40m). Reassessment of 2004/05 forecast expenditure (-£12m). Review of miscellaneous requirement including Exchange of Letters Risk Provision (-£40m), design of UK Specific Support (-£3m), Environmental Protection (-£3m) and Autonomic Logistic Information System interoperability (-£6m). Block IV weapons as a result of JSF programme re-alignment (-£368m) and associated increase Cost of Capital charge (+£44m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-77</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>Change in dollar/pound exchange rate (MPR02 +£189m;
MPR03 -£9m; MPR04 -£85m;
MPR05 -£181m; MPR06 +£9m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+58</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>MPR 04: Re-examination of risk within the overall programme. (+£87m). MPR05: Reduction of Risk line as a result of programme delays (-£29m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-202</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the approved figures at Main Gate. (-£213m). Variation due to revised approval figures (+£11m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-378</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</th>
<th>
965
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2005/2006
</td>
<td>
2007/2008
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost[^1]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
8 embarked aircraft at Readiness 2 (2-5 days notice to move).
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>The tailored Demonstration Main Gate noted but did not approve ISD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>Variation (months)</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
3
</td>
<td>e. Operational impact of ISD variation</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>Survivability</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>Interoperability</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>Combat radius</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>Mission performance</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>Mission reliability</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>Logistic footprint</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>Sortie generation rates</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td colspan="2">100 %</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 04</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>The Short Take Off element of KUR 04 (based on Invincible Class (CVS) not Future Aircraft Carrier (CVF)) will be changed in the ongoing KUR review, although current projections indicate robust Short Take Off performance from CVF. Weight challenges and propulsion system integration issues place the Vertical Landing Bring Back element of KUR 04 at increased risk; the IPT has commenced programme action to amend the CVF integration contract to include a requirement to undertake Ship-borne Rolling Vertical Landing (SRVL).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 06</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Subject to intensive programme action by Prime Contractor. Funded design options that significantly reduce risk have been identified and further changes will be considered in due course.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Approval was obtained in November 1996 to enter the Concept Demonstration Phase (CDP) on the JSF programme under an MOU signed in December 1995. The phase began in November 1996 with two competing US Prime Contractors (Boeing and Lockheed Martin) designing weapons systems and flying demonstration aircraft on which the selection of the preferred bidder was based. The phase completed in October 2001 with the announcement of Lockheed Martin as the successful bidder. Studies into alternative options to JSF to meet the requirement were also conducted but were rejected on cost effective grounds. The options were US F/A18E, French Rafale M, a “navalised” Eurofighter and an advanced Harrier.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase cost
</th>
<th>Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Actual Cost</td>
<td>
144
</td>
<td>
7.2%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
150
</td>
<td>
7.5%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-6
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
January 2001
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals[^3]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>
1971
</td>
<td>
2034
</td>
<td>
2236
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate<sup>†</sup></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2012
</td>
<td>April 2014</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2012
</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

[^1]: The JCA Main Gate was tailored for Development only to match the US procurement cycle. Unit Production Cost approval will be sought as part of MG UK production approval.

[^2]: The In Service Date (ISD) approval will be sought as part of the incremental Production Approval strategy.

[^3]: Three point estimates for the Production Phase have yet to be determined, as costs are dependant on the final aircraft numbers.

† For MG Development approval, ISD was noted, not approved.
