---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: FALCON
page_from: 43.0
page_to: 50.0
project_label: Falcon
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_43_50.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FALCON

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

THEATRE AND FORMATION COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Command, Control & Information Infrastructure)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Falcon will provide the comprehensive deployable communication systems that are needed at all levels of command and will operate in conjunction with systems such as Bowman, Cormorant, Skynet 5 and with allies’ communication and information systems. It will not duplicate the capability of existing systems, but will be the high capacity system that binds together tactical communications in a theatre of operations as an integral part of the plans for Networked Enabled Capability. Falcon will replace, incrementally, a number of current systems, in particular Ptarmigan.

The programme comprises four increments of which only Increment A is reflected in this report. Increment A will provide a tactical formation level secure communication system for the High Readiness Force (Land) and the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps. It will enable units to be deployed rapidly to areas of crisis, thereby allowing the UK to remain a pivotal member of the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps. The system will be modular and upgradeable, incorporating much off the shelf technology that will ease management of obsolescence throughout its service life. Falcon will require significantly less manpower to operate than the system being replaced.

Following Main Gate approval for Increment A in March 2006, the Demonstration and

Manufacture contract was awarded to BAE Systems Insyte. Negotiations to acquire the MAN 6 Tonne Support Vehicle have been completed. The Increment A Equipment Acceptance Trial, currently contracted for early 2009, will be a key milestone in the system’s development.

Falcon Increment C, providing capability for Royal Air Force deployed operating bases, is the same equipment as contracted under Falcon Increment A. Falcon Increment C achieved Main Gate approval in July 2007 and was added as a Falcon Increment A contract amendment in September 2007.

Increments B and D are planned to provide tactical communication systems for the more mobile Division/Brigade level (Increment B) and for littoral warfare and deep support roles (Increment

D). Further Falcon Increments will be subject to separate approvals.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>Procurement Route</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
BAE Systems Insyte
</td>
<td>Demonstration and Manufacture</td>
<td>Firm price</td>
<td>UK competition</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
291
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
324
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-33
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-1
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>+1</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Correction of treatment in Contracted Out Services VAT from previous years to align with Main Gate Approval</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>May 2007</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Costs saved due to Falcon Vehicle change identified by contract study</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-5</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Assessment of later years’ risk mitigation budget yielded a reduction in 2011/12 (-£4m). Reduction in Risk Mitigation funding in 2008/09 to ensure overall Falcon Increment A affordability within EP07 programme plans (-£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>Vehicle Military Engineering Programme for Falcon vehicles was transferred in 2006/07 to Joint Electronic Surveillance Integrated Project Team (-£1m). Vehicle Military Engineering Programme for Falcon vehicles was transferred 2005/06 to Joint Electronic Surveillance Integrated Project Team (-£2m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-7</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Condition of Main Gate Financial Approval was any planned accrual in 2005/06 that could not be achieved could not be slipped into subsequent financial years (-£7m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-17</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (80%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-33</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
82
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2008/2009
</td>
<td>
2011/2012
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
Minimum scaling to provide wide and local area deployable communications that will support a non-enduring Medium Scale UK Framework Nation deployment short of war fighting.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
June 2010
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
February 2011
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-8
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-8
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
-8
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th></th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3"></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
Falcon shall meet the Information Exchange Requirements of its User communities
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
Falcon shall have the mobility necessary to support its User communities
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
Falcon shall be sufficiently flexible so resources can be proportionally matched to the scale of effort required during all phases of an operation
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
Falcon shall support the passage of secure information at a level appropriate to its protective marking
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
Falcon managers shall be able to manage all aspects of a Falcon deployment in an efficient, timely and effective manner in order to meet the needs of the User
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
Falcon Users shall be able to exchange information between co-operating forces in Joint and Combined operations without disruption to the conduct of operations
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
Falcon shall minimise the manpower and training burden in order to provide efficient support to operations
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
Falcon shall survive in a hostile physical and electronic environment
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>
Falcon shall be sustainable on operations
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Increment A of the Falcon programme gained Initial Gate approval in July 2002, following an extended Concept Phase that considered two key options: buy off the shelf technology (Bowman and Cormorant); and buy new capability. It was concluded that a new capability was required.

Marconi Selenia (now Selex) and BAE Systems Insyte were selected for the 15 month

Assessment Phase contract and to compete for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase prime contract for Increment A. The Assessment Phase contracts concentrated on reducing the risk in the proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture phase, including demonstration of components and subsystems to achieve an acceptable, affordable, low risk solution. In addition, Whole Life Cost estimates were refined. Bidders’ proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture phase were submitted on 31 March 2004.

The procurement strategy endorsed at Initial Gate comprised four increments: Increment A provided for High Readiness Force (Land) and the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps; Increment B for UK divisions and brigades under armour; Increment C for Royal Air Force deployed operational bases; and Increment D for littoral warfare and deep support, including higher mobility. Increment D remains an unfunded aspiration.

During the later stages of the Assessment Phase in 2004/2005, a savings option removed funding from the first two years of the Demonstration and Manufacture phase, resulting in a review of the incremental procurement strategy. Two options were considered. The first was for a single programme that effectively would have combined all three funded increments. This would have necessitated the project returning to pre-Initial Gate status and delayed the ISD by up to 4 years. This option was adopted as the planning assumption and reflected in MPR 2005. The second option was for the delivery of
“early capability” that would provide for one medium scale deployment by 2010. It would utilise the savings option funding profile and exploit the existing contractor bids for Increment A. This option was explored and found to be viable.

In July 2005, approval was given to the further in-depth exploration of the second option and the selection of BAE Systems Insyte as the preferred bidder for Falcon Increment A. A programme was developed in conjunction with the preferred bidder that was affordable within the available funding.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 31                        | 9.7%                                                      |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 30                        | 9.4%                                                      |
| Variation                     | +1                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
March 2006
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 2002
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
44
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>290</td>
<td>308</td>
<td>324</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>212</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>255</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
October 2009
</td>
<td>June 2010</td>
<td>
February 2011
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>June 2006</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2007
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
