---
year: 2007.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: TERRIER
page_from: 141.0
page_to: 148.0
project_label: TERRIER
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2007_141_148.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

TERRIER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

MOBILITY (MOB)

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Terrier is designed to be a highly mobile, robust and reliable armoured earthmoving vehicle, which will support mobility, counter mobility and survivability throughout the spectrum of conflict. It will be optimised for battlefield preparation and used by Close Support (CS) Engineer units. Terrier is being procured to replace the capability provided by the Combat Engineer Tractors (CET). The programme was let under competitive tender and is now over midway through its Demonstration Phase which is due to complete in January 2009. Throughout the year the Prototype vehicle has been used to prove the technical capability of Terrier and to start the reliability improvement programme. The programme has been adversely affected by a change in the Customer’s requirement for Bowman communications system;
this has required the instigation of a new project to develop and demonstrate a revised fit for Terrier. The consequence of this change is reflected in this report. There has been progress with the

A400M aircraft in so much as it has been shown technically feasible to reinforce the cargo floor. The

A400M Integrated Project Team (IPT) has an action in hand for this modification. The four Demonstrator vehicles are in the course of construction and will be available for the next phase of testing over the next six months. Release for Production (Milestone 12) is the next key event and is planned for late 2007.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Contractor(s)
</th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</th>
<th>
Contract Type
</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
BAE Systems Land

Systems (formally known as Royal Ordnance plc)</td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</td>
<td>
Firm/Fixed price
</td>
<td>United Kingdom competition</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
BAE Systems Land

Systems (formally known as Royal Ordnance plc)</td>
<td>
Contractor Logistic Support (first five years)
</td>
<td>
Fixed price
</td>
<td>United Kingdom competition</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
299
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
304
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-5
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+3
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Residual Terrier cost growth caused by, and remaining after, customerdriven Bowman requirements change.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>December 2006</td>
<td>-17</td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</td>
<td>Requirements change for Bowman (+£9m) and Training Infrastructure (+£8m) transferred to separate projects.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
July 2006
</td>
<td>+17</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>Requirements for Bowman and Training Infrastructure changed.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Departmental Review - Inclusion of projected Year End Accruals for the remainder of the project. This change reduces the annual Net Assets balance and the subsequent Cost of Capital Charge.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+4</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Cost of Capital – Difference between the profile of the Asset Deliveries prior to contract placement and those included in the current forecast cost.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-9</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-5</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</th>
<th>
92
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2008/2009
</td>
<td>
2009/2010
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3.1</td>
<td>2.6</td>
<td>65</td>
<td>
65
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
A total of 20 equipments delivered (4 to Army Training and Recruiting Agency (ATRA) &amp; 16 to Land Command) and supportable (Logistic Support Date (LSD) achieved, training in place, 20 crews trained).
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
September 2009
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
December 2008
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+9
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+12
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>July 2006</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>Customer change in requirements for Bowman.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the approved figures at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+9</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Support costs of current equipment</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>Costs for this delay have been factored and subsumed into the Department’s assessment of Force Level Requirements</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

The requirements change for the Bowman communications system was driven by the end user organisations as a result of tests carried out on the installation in Combat Engineer Tractor (CET). The choice lay between accepting Terrier into service with a Bowman installation which could not support the operational communications required for safe operation or accepting a delay to the ISD. Balancing the operational risk of having a severely limited Terrier capability due to the safety concerns, or having a fully capable one late, the Customer chose the latter. The current situation with CET is that in view of the safety concerns, it can only be used on operations under a waiver signed at 2 star or in a highly controlled training environment where communication off platform is not required. Those CET that have been converted to a Bowman communications fit are being held in a controlled humidity environment at the Ashchurch storage facility so that should an operational waiver be signed they can be delivered to the operation.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>User shall be able to dig vehicle slots</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>User shall be able to dig, carry and load spoil &amp; rubble</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>User shall be able to dig trenches</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>User shall be able to grapple, grab and carry items weighing no more than 2 tonnes over short distances</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>At battleweight should not exceed 31.5 tonnes</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>User shall be able to deploy by air</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>User shall be afforded levels of indirect fire protection commensurate with its role</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>User shall be afforded levels of direct fire protection commensurate with its role</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>User shall have a 70% probability of completing a battlefield mission without failure</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</td>
<td>User shall have a 13.5% probability of completing a BFM without basic failure</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
11
</td>
<td>User should be able to maintain required capabilities while operating in climatic categories A2 to C1</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td colspan="2">100 %</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>KUR 06</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>The air transportability of Terrier has been successfully addressed by the A400M IPT through the placing of a contract amendment with Airbus Military Sociedad Limitada for a Locally Reinforced Cargo Floor.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 06</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Terrier must be air transportable. Verification criteria requires this to be demonstrated in A400M. The A400M cargo floor loading study shows that it is possible to modify the floor to take Terrier. We are now awaiting the outcome of the DEC Expeditionary Logistics &amp;
Support (ELS) funding review</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

A funded feasibility study for Terrier concluded that the most cost-effective way of meeting the requirement was to develop a new vehicle, where possible integrating in-service sub-systems and commercial off-the-shelf equipment. Approval was given for a competitive Project Definition phase in August 1998 and Firm Price contracts were placed in August 1999 with BAE Systems (with the work undertaken by its subsidiary Royal Ordnance plc) and Vickers Defence Systems. Both contractors developed detailed designs making extensive use of Computer Aided Design tools, virtual reality modelling, rigs and trials. The capabilities required and constraints imposed by physical limitations, such as rail and air transportability, resulted in very similar technical solutions. Both contractors offered tracked vehicles close in size weight and mobility to the Warrior tracked infantry fighting vehicle, having a crew of two and providing protection against small arms, high explosive fragments and mines. An Invitation to Tender (ITT) was issued in February 2001 to both companies which sought detailed proposals and prices for all later phases. The ITT also adopted Smart Acquisition initiatives such as Progressive Acceptance and innovative Contractor Logistic Support proposals. The Main Gate Business Case was approved on 17 July 2002. The contract for Demonstration,

Manufacture and Phase 1 Contractor Logistic Support was placed with Royal Ordnance plc on 19 July 2002.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase cost
</th>
<th>Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Actual Cost</td>
<td>
17
</td>
<td>
5%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
17
</td>
<td>
5%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 2002
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
August 1998
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
47
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>
284
</td>
<td>
294
</td>
<td>
304
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
291
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Forecast ISD at Main Gate
</td>
<td>
July 2008
</td>
<td>
September 2008
</td>
<td>
December 2008
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2007
</td>
<td>December 2008</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
