---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: SOOTHSAYER
page_from: 117.0
page_to: 124.0
project_label: SOOTHSAYER
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_117_124.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

SOOTHSAYER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

JOINT ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The Soothsayer integrated ground based Electronic Warfare system will provide the supported Commander with a 24 hour, all weather source of intelligence, through its Communications and Non Communications Electronic Support Measures capability. The system detects, locates and identifies radio and radar signals. In addition, Soothsayer will provide an integrated Communications Electronic Counter Measures system. Soothsayer replaces a number of systems including Odette and the Interim Non-Communications Equipment.

Following a competitive Assessment Phase, a Demonstration and Manufacture contract was placed with Lockheed Martin (Owego USA) in August 2003. Soothsayer will be delivered in three main phases. The first phase, which includes Communications Electronic Support Measures and interim Communications Electronic Counter Measures, is expected to be delivered in 2009 (In Service Date). The second Capability Phase is planned for delivery by 2010. Under both phases the system will be fitted to the Meonic (previously the Light Role Supacat High Mobility Transport 6\6) soft skin vehicle. The third phase, which is planned for delivery in 2013 subject to armoured vehicle availability, will provide an armoured Communications Electronic Support Measures and Non Communications Electronic Support Measures capability.

Delay in the development and delivery of the Meonic vehicle resulted in a slip to the In Service Date and an increase in procurement costs being declared in January 2005. Vehicle reliability issues have been addressed and first phase deliveries are now complete. However, technical issues with the development and testing of the Communications Electronic Support Measures system have led to the forecast In Service Date being further delayed.

## 1b. Associated projects

| Critical to Achievement of In Service Date |                          | Critical to Initial Gate Requirement |                          |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Project Title                                  | Forecast In Service Date | Project Title                            | Forecast In Service Date |
| Meonic                                         | 2009                     | \-                                       | \-                       |

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>Procurement Route</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Lockheed Martin Systems Integration, Owego, USA</td>
<td>Demonstration and Manufacture</td>
<td>Firm Price</td>
<td>Competition</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
202
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
150
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+52
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+7
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td>+6</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>System Production and Test delays have led to an increase in the Cost of Capital.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
November 2007
</td>
<td>+1</td>
<td>
Change in associated project
</td>
<td>Uplift in Equipment Procurement Plan Financial Year 2008/09 for increased Capability Phase 2 and 3 Meonic Unit Production Cost.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Equipment Plan Option to delay armoured delivery until 2013.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+55</td>
<td>
Change in associated project
</td>
<td>Expansion of Soothsayer scope to develop the Meonic vehicle and manage the late supply to Lockheed Martin (Main Gate to Review Note
[50%] variation). (+£14m) Equipment Plan Option to move the armoured platform from the cancelled Multi Role Armoured Vehicle to an interim platform in 2010 and subsequently to the Future Rapid Effects System around 2013. (+ £41m)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-8</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimate at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+52</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
84
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2005/2006
</td>
<td>
2010/2011
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>In Service Date Definition:</th>
<th>
Y Troop Royal Marines trained and ready to support 3 Commando Brigade on a Medium Scale Peace Keeping operation with a mobile Communications Electronic Support Measures/Communications Electronic Counter Measures capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast In Service Date</td>
<td>
June 2009
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved In Service Date at Main Gate</td>
<td>
June 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+24
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+16
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved In Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
January 2008
</td>
<td>
+12
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Sensor development and platform integration delayed due to technical issues.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
August 2007
</td>
<td>
+4
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Draft contractor plans indicates new date.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+4
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Lockheed Martin subcontractor forecast late delivery</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+10
</td>
<td>
Change in associated project
</td>
<td>Meonic late delivery delays Soothsayer integration and test.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-6
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimate at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
+ 24
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from In Service Date variation

| Type of Cost/Saving      | Cost £m | Saving £m | Explanation                                                                                                   |
|----------------|----------------|----------------|-------------------------|
| Increase in procurement cost | +5          | \-            | Late supply of Meonic to Lockheed Martin as Government Furnished Assets caused increase in Prime Contractor costs |

## 3e. Operational impact of In Service Date variation

A reduced Electronic Warfare capability

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 01
</td>
<td>
The user shall be provided with an Electric Warfare capability which can be deployed to areas of the world with climatic conditions A1 to C1
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 02
</td>
<td>
The user shall receive timely Electronic Warfare information
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 03
</td>
<td>
The user shall be provided with an Electronic Counter Measures capability
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 04
</td>
<td>
The user shall be provided with an Electronic Warfare capability that meets the Soothsayer targets set
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 05
</td>
<td>
The system shall be compatible with the developments in the digitisation programme
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 06
</td>
<td>
The system shall be interoperable with relevant databases (Non Communications Electronic Support Measures)
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 07
</td>
<td>
The system shall be interoperable with other related systems
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 08
</td>
<td>
The platforms should retain mobility classifications after system equipment is installed in order to maintain speed of advance with supported formations
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 09
</td>
<td>
The user shall be provided with an Electronic Warfare capability that meets the sustainability criteria expressed in the Battlefields Mission Paper
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 01</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>KUR 01 testing has identified environmental limitations in equipments and recovery plan is yet to be confirmed.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 03</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>KUR 03 testing identified some limitations in Electronic Counter Measures function; recovery plan has been agreed but not fully implemented.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 04</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>KUR 04 recent testing has identified technical solution as being insufficient, a recovery plan has been defined, but not agreed, that will address the KUR.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 07</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>KUR 07 original mechanism to allow interoperability with other systems will not be fully implemented; initial discussions indicate an alternative way forward is possible.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 09</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>KUR 09 required levels of sustainability are not currently supported by the contract due to changes in the logistics chain; this is currently being addressed as part of a commercial negotiation.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Initial Gate business case for Soothsayer was approved in August 1999. Following a competition, two prime contractors, Lockheed Martin and Thales Defence were selected to provide a technical solution along with costs, risks and timescales for a Demonstration and Manufacture phase. Originally, down-selection to one prime contractor was planned for the end of the Demonstration Phase. In April 2002, an extension to the Assessment Phase and further risk reduction work was approved, and agreement given to down-selection at Main Gate Approval.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|----------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 24                        | 11%                                                       |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 19                        | 9%                                                        |
| Variation                     | +5                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
August 2003
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
August 1999
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
48
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>140</td>
<td>142</td>
<td>150</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>95</td>
<td>96</td>
<td>106</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. In Service Date boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast In Service Date at Main Gate</td>
<td>
November 2006
</td>
<td>
December 2006
</td>
<td>June 2007</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
January 2006
</td>
<td>July 2006</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
