---
year: 2009.0
project_type: Pre-Main Investment Decision
project: Future Rapid Effect System
page_from: 301.0
page_to: 304.0
project_label: Future Rapid Effects System
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2009_301_304.md
---
Future Rapid Effect System

Team Responsible

Future Rapid Effect System Integrated Project Team

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Director of Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Officer

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

Number of Projects / Increments

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision - Future Rapid Effect System Utility Vehicle, Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicle

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The Ministry of Defence has outlined a two track approach to meeting its armoured fighting vehicle requirement. In the short term it has an urgent need to upgrade the current fleet. In the longer term it needs to equip United Kingdom Armed Forces with a medium weight capability that would be able to project power world-wide rapidly. Future Rapid Effect System is the response to this longer-term requirement.

Future Rapid Effect System will deliver a new, medium weight armoured vehicle fleet with higher levels of deployability and survivability than the current fleet, with the potential to grow its capability as new technology becomes available. The current planning assumption is to deliver over 3,000 vehicles. The original requirement was for 1,757 vehicles but this was increased in 2004 under an equipment programme option when the Total Fleet Requirement had been established.

Future Rapid Effect System will be part of a balanced force consisting of Heavy, Medium and Light brigades giving the ability to deploy forces rapidly with higher levels of firepower, protection and mobility than Light Forces can achieve, but with deployability and agility that cannot be achieved by Heavy Forces. The current threat on operations, particularly from rocket propelled grenades, heavy machine guns and mines/improvised explosive devices, has reinforced the need for adequately protected armoured vehicles.

Future Rapid Effect System will replace the Army’s obsolescent Saxon, FV 430 and Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked) vehicles.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

The Future Rapid Effect System fleet will encompass 16 roles. The total capability is expected to comprise five families of vehicles: Utility, Reconnaissance, Medium Armour, Manoeuvre Support and Basic Capability Utility. An incremental approach to capability delivery is envisaged with an Initial Operating Capability comprising the first elements of the Reconnaissance family followed by a phased approach to delivering the full capability in planned increments thereafter. The initial Assessment Phase was approved in April 2004 and has focused primarily on those roles that will make up the Initial Operating Capability. The Assessment Phase has involved analysing the options for meeting the requirement, managing the programme of technical risk reduction work and developing the acquisition strategy for future phases.

Options for meeting the Utility Vehicle requirement included solutions currently available off the shelf, existing development programmes and new start options. Vehicles currently available off the shelf were assessed to be unable, now or in the future, to carry the weight necessary to meet the Future Rapid Effect System protection requirements. New start options were considered too long and too costly and therefore both off the shelf and new start options were discounted. An assessment of platforms currently in development indicated that they have the potential to operate at the weight necessary to provide adequate protection. The potential of current development vehicles to meet the Future Rapid Effect System requirement was the basis of our more detailed assessment of the candidate designs in 2007.

The Acquisition Strategy was approved by the Minister of State for Defence Procurement and the Investment Approvals Board in June 2007. The approved approach was to establish an alliance led by the Department, supported by a strong and independent industrial player acting in the role of System of Systems Integrator. The strategy includes a strong competitive element with the Utility Vehicle Design, the System of Systems Integrator and the Utility Vehicle Integrator to be selected by competition.

Regarding the Specialist Vehicle roles of Reconnaissance, Medium Armour, and Manoeuvre Support, emerging findings to date highlight a similar direction of travel, in that pure commercial off the shelf vehicles do not meet the user requirement and new build or the restart of previous programmes such as Tracer would be prohibitively costly and time consuming. Assessment work is therefore directed accordingly and a number of study contracts have been let with industry.

## A.3. Progress

Utility Vehicle Design Competition: On 8 May 2008 the Minister of State for Defence Equipment and

Support announced that Piranha V had been provisionally selected as the preferred Utility Vehicle Design. However, following senior level discussions with General Dynamics (UK) Ltd, aimed at resolving a number of commercial issues, the Ministry of Defence terminated General Dynamics (UK)'s provisionally preferred bidder status in December 2008. This was announced by the Secretary of State as part of the Equipment Examination announcement on 11 December 2008.

System of Systems Integrator Competition: The contract for the initial phase of System of Systems Integrator support was awarded to the team of Thales and Boeing on 24 January 2008.

Utility Vehicle Integrator competition. The Utility Vehicle Integrator competition has reached the Pre Qualification Questionnaire downselect stage and is held pending decisions on the way forward for the Utility Vehicle programme.

Following the Equipment Examination in December 2008, the equipment priority for the Army shifted from the Utility Vehicle to the Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme and the Future Rapid Effect System Scout/ Reconnaissance Block 1. The impact of the Equipment Examination has delayed the programme.

The associated Utility Vehicle expenditure of £133m also supported activities that have developed Future Rapid Effect System requirements. The Department believes this has increased technological maturity and enhanced the project community knowledge and these aspects have been captured/retained for the future benefit of the programme.

The Specialist Vehicle element of the Future Rapid Effect System programme continues to make good progress and secured Investment Approvals Board and Ministerial approval in June 2008 for funding to conduct the Assessment Phase. The Ministry of Defence expects to announce its Acquisition Strategy in the coming months and the programme is expected thereafter to move into the Demonstration Phase of its Acquisition Cycle.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Strategic Defence Review New Chapter 2002 and Defence White Paper 2003 set out the need for expeditionary focused, balanced and rapidly deployable medium weight forces. Defence Strategic Guidance 2005 directed that medium forces should be based on Armoured Fighting Vehicles optimised for rapid effect, a theme continued in Defence Strategic Guidance 2008. Medium weight Armoured Fighting Vehicles currently in service are obsolescent and have significant capability shortfalls on operations.

Future Rapid Effect System will deliver a fleet of new medium weight armoured vehicles which will provide better protection, operational mobility and firepower than light forces; but without the logistic footprint of a heavy force. Future Rapid Effect System forces will be effective across the operational spectrum, conducting operations from peacekeeping to war fighting. Future Rapid Effect System equipped forces will form the backbone of the Land component of the Joint Medium Weight Capability and contribute significantly to the Army’s Balanced Force.

Failure to proceed would therefore put at risk the timely provision of a new flexible, rapid intervention capability. Concurrently, those in-service vehicles (e.g. Saxon, Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked)) due to be replaced by Future Rapid Effect System would incur increasing support costs and obsolescence.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="4">Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Utility Vehicle</td>
<td colspan="4">Acquisition Programme with full and open competition</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicle</td>
<td colspan="4">Acquisition Programme with full and open competition</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a proportion of total

estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Assessment Phase</td>
<td>113</td>
<td>182</td>
<td>+69</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicles Assessment Phase</td>
<td>109</td>
<td>138</td>
<td>+29</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>222</td>
<td>320</td>
<td>+98</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Utility Vehicle</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicles</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost – not applicable

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not applicable

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Utility Vehicle</td>
<td></td>
<td>May 2004</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Rapid Effect System Specialist

Vehicles</td>
<td></td>
<td>June 2008</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Utility Vehicle</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicles</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In Service Date - not applicable

## C.4. Inital Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.6. Support / Service / PFI Contract - not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels – not applicable

## D.2. Performance against Lines of Development – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures – not applicable
