---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Assessment phase projects
project: Chinook New Buy
page_from: 272.0
page_to: 276.0
project_label: Chinook New Buy
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2011_272_276.md
---
| Project Title            |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Chinook New Buy              |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Team Responsible         |                                             |
| Chinook Project Team         |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name   | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| Chinook New Buy              | Pre-Main Investment Decision                |
|                              |                                             |

CHINOOK NEW BUY

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

1.  The Requirement

The UK currently has a fleet of 46 Chinook, delivered between 1981 and 2001. The new Rotary Wing Strategy, announced by the Secretary of State in December 2009, established that the Future Heavy Lift capability would be provided by the Chinook helicopter. The Rotary Wing Strategy set out the intention to buy an additional 22 new Chinook, in addition to the replacement for the two aircraft destroyed on operations in Afghanistan in August 2009 (for which approval will be sought through the HM Treasury Reserve), that would take the Chinook fleet up to 70 aircraft.

Operational Analysis has routinely identified the unique strength of capability provided by Chinook. The most recent Lift Advanced Concept Phase 3 analysis provides clear evidence of the need for a greater number of Chinook helicopters. However, Operational Analysis has not identified an obvious blend of helicopter types that is affordable, cost-effective, and which meets all the MOD's helicopter requirements. Chinook delivers more capability for a given investment than smaller types, and hence the earlier this rebalancing can occur, the faster overall UK helicopter capability can be increased.

The user requires a vertical heavy-lift capability to support military operations in the Land domain, which must enable the rapid deployment, in-theatre movement, insertion, re-supply and extraction of Joint Forces along with their equipment. It must be tactically flexible, agile, network-enabled and able to operate and survive throughout the joint and combined battle space, conducting high tempo missions from land bases with a minimal logistics footprint, in all environments and able to sustain missions for the duration of operations.

1.  The Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>In March 2010 Initial Gate approval for the Chinook New Buy project was granted to conduct an Assessment Phase at a total cost of
£67M. This funding approval assumed that a Main Gate Business Case would be presented in December 2010, and that a Demonstration and Manufacture contract would be placed shortly thereafter. A key issue for the Assessment Phase was to reach a decision on the configuration of the aircraft. As the standard of Chinook operated by the UK (old US 'D' model) is no longer in production, only two aircraft configurations were considered:
(1) standard US Army CH-47F models procured through Foreign Military Sales and (2) CH-47F with a modification based on the UK JULIUS "glass"
cockpit configuration, a programme which was subject to a separate investment decision in 2009. In April 2010 the Investment Approvals Board endorsed a Review Note to down-select to a preferred configuration for the new Chinooks. The configuration selected was the CH-47F equipped with a development of the Thales JULIUS cockpit and a digital automatic flight control system and current UK Chinook Theatre Entry Standard modifications. In Sept 2010 the Strategic Defence and Security Review reduced the requirement to 14 aircraft (12+ 2 attrition), reflecting reprioritisation of resources. The further two Chinook would still be procured as attrition aircraft to replace those lost in Afghanistan in 2009. In January 2011, subsequent to Strategic Defence and Security Review announcements, and the delay to a Main Gate decision for New Buy Chinook, a Review Note was submitted to the Investment Approvals Board seeking an uplift of £29M to the approval to sustain critical path activity and protect all delivery options to the end of May 2011. However, the Investment Approvals Board only approved an uplift of £6.5M to fund programme activity to the end of March 2011 and requested further advice in early March, assuming the Defence Board and Ministers had determined the way forward on Chinook in the context of the wider Planning Round. The target Initial Operating Capability of the new Chinook capability is one aircraft Theatre Entry Standard available by 31 December 2012 for deployment to Afghanistan with sufficient Defence Lines of Development in place.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

CHINOOK NEW BUY

# A.3 Progress

In April 2011 the Department's latest financial plan captured the Defence Board's direction to pursue a 14 Chinook aircraft programme that would see the first flight in Quarter one of 2013 and all aircraft delivered by end of 2015. HM Treasury approved an Investment Approvals Board uplift to the Assessment Phase of £23.4M in April 2011. The Department is currently seeking an extension to the Assessment Phase which was due to expire at the end of May 2011 as the Main Gate investment decision is on hold pending a review of affordability within the defence programme.

# A.4 Capability Risks

There is an urgent need to replace those aircraft recently lost on operations and to build the MOD's CH-47 capability in Afghanistan to allow for the withdrawl of Sea King Mk4. Further investment will be required to address obsolescence and sustain the Chinook fleet to the planned Out of Service Date of 2040. In the interim, the output of our current helicopter fleet continues to be eroded by insufficient support budgets that limit the number of hours flown by the fleet and, as a result, the efficiency and effectiveness of the MOD's capabilities.

# A.5 Associated Projects

# A.6 Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 56%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th colspan="2">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
<td>Approval Status</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chinook New Buy</td>
<td>Boeing as Directed Prime Contractor</td>
<td>Pre-Main Gate</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# A.7 Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 5%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="6">
Description
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">
Since May 2006, the in-service Chinook fleet has been successfully supported through a sparesinclusive availability based contract with Boeing, known as Through-Life Customer Support.. The second five year pricing period of Through Life Customer Support commences in 2011. The intent would be to continue supporting the fleet through this arrangement, provided it can be proved to offer the best Value for Money.
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Title</td>
<td>
Contractor
</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td colspan="2">
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Through-life Customer Support</td>
<td>
Boeing
</td>
<td>Assessment to In Service</td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</td>
<td colspan="2">
Single Source
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

CHINOOK NEW BUY

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/
Increment Title</td>
<td>
Approved Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>as a

proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
<td>Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chinook New Buy</td>
<td>67</td>
<td>97</td>
<td>+30</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>67</td>
<td>97</td>
<td>+30</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Chinook New Buy</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

2.  Unit production cost/Quantities required

3.  Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

4.  Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</th>
<th>In-year expenditure (£m)</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>70</td>
<td>70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>70</td>
<td>70</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

CHINOOK NEW BUY

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Chinook New Buy</td>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>May 2011</td>
<td>14</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Chinook New Buy</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

2.  Full Operating Capability

3.  Support / Service / PFI Contract

Project Summary Sheet
