---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Assessment phase projects
project: United Kingdom Co-operative Engagement Capability Frigate  and Destroyers
  Programme
page_from: 322.0
page_to: 326.0
project_label: United Kingdom Co-operative Engagement Capability Frigate  and Destroyers
  Programme
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2011_322_326.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 59%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project Title</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate and Destroyers Programme</td>
<td>
FALSE
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td rowspan="2"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Team Responsible</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Joint Sensor and Engagement Networks (JSENS)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td rowspan="2"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Senior Responsible Owner</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Head of Above Water Capability</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Project/Increment Name Current Status of Projects / Increments</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate and Destroyers Programme Pre-Main Investment Decision</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

UNITED KINGDOM CO-OPERATIVE ENGAGEMENT CAPABILITY FRIGATES AND DESTROYERS PROGRAMME

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

1.  The Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>The Co-operative Engagement Capability is a United States Naval System fitted to an increasing number of United States assets including ships, aircraft, and Army and Marine Corps land systems. Co-operative Engagement Capability does not replace any single system; rather it optimises war-fighting capabilities inherent in existing and future combat systems. UK Co-operative Engagement Capability is a UK Network-Enabled Capability project which provides an advanced air and missile defence capability by sharing and fusing engagement quality data from suitably equipped platforms to deliver a single, coherent, stable air picture. It will fill the capability gap originally identified in Commander-in-Chief Fleet’s Military Capability reports and re-affirmed in the Above Water Effects capability audit in 2007, updated in 2009, to detect, monitor, and counter Air-Warfare threats. It will also reduce a gap in interoperability with the United States. UK Co-operative Engagement Capability enhances the ability of fitted platforms to work together in detection, tracking and engagement of air targets. This capability represents a major advance in both air and missile defence.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  The Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Operational Analysis conducted during the Concept Phase assessed seven options; Co-operative Engagement Capability was identified as the only solution capable of meeting capability requirements. The objective of the Assessment Phase is to establish the most cost-effective solution to the requirement for a Co-operative Engagement Capability for maritime platforms. It is a proven United States-developed programme which the UK is considering purchasing via the Foreign Military Sales process. The UK, with United States assistance, is developing and testing the platform architecture and support and integration aspects, to reduce risk prior to Main Gate. Assessment Phase 1. Approval for Assessment Phase 1 was received in May 2000 and, following a competition, contracts were placed with Lockheed Martin UK (Integrated Systems) and Raytheon UK, with down-selection to Lockheed Martin (UK) for Assessment Phase 2. This was for the Type 23 Frigate only. Also during this phase a study contract was undertaken by BAE Systems to investigate a Co-operative Engagement Capability fit on the Type 45 destroyer. Assessment Phase 2. In May 2003 approval was received to accelerate the risk reduction work on Type 45 Destroyer by two years, at no additional procurement cost. In July 2003, this work was placed on contract by means of an amendment to the Type 45 Destroyer prime contract with BAE Systems, the Prime Contracting Office for the Type 45 Destroyer. Costed proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase for both Type23 and Type45 were delivered by Lockheed Martin (UK) and BAE Systems respectively in 2005. However, an Option was taken as part of the Equipment Plan 2005 planning round extending the Assessment Phase by five years, enabling further de-risking of the project. Assessment Phase 2b. De-risking study contracts were placed with Lockheed Martin (UK) and BAE Systems to investigate the options for integrating the UK Co-operative Engagement Capability into the two platforms and their existing/planned systems and to produce recommendations for design solutions. This work was successfully completed in March 2008. Assessment Phase 3. Approval was obtained in September 2008 to proceed with the remaining Assessment Phase work. This covers detailed design and delivery of the Assessment Phase 2b study recommendations for UK Co-operative Engagement Capability system installation and interface on both platforms. The Planning Round in 2010 delayed the planned In-Service Date to , extending the Assessment Phase. Planning Round 2011 has changed the platform fit from Type 23 Frigates to Type 26 Global Combat Ships and brought forward the In-Service Date to . The outputs from the extended Assessment Phase activities will support the main investment decision currently forecast for . Further Operational Analysis, a review of technology assumptions since the Initial Gate approval in 2000, and a revised Investment Appraisal have also been commissioned.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

UNITED KINGDOM CO-OPERATIVE ENGAGEMENT CAPABILITY FRIGATES AND DESTROYERS PROGRAMME

# A.3 Progress

1.  contract was placed on BVT Surface Fleet (now BAES Surface Ships Ltd) in January 2009, amended in 2010, to complete the design and installation aspects of Assessment Phase 3. Activity during 2010 and up to 31 March 2011 has focused on de-risking equipment interfaces, developing programme and technical project plans, updating the Operational Analysis, and drafting a Statement of Work to deliver the next phase following the main investment decision.

1.  Capability Risks

Co-operative Engagement Capability is a force multiplier in that it will enable effective Anti-Air Warfare and missile defence capabilities with a reduced number of platforms by providing a single, coherent and stable networked air picture. A UK Co-operative Engagement Capability partly mitigates the decision to delete hulls seven and eight of the Type 45 Fleet. The effectiveness of such platforms would be significantly diminished if the Co-operative Engagement Capability is not provided.

1.  Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 57%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Title of Associated Project</th>
<th>
Forecast In Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability
</th>
<th>
Approval Status
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Type 45 Destroyers</td>
<td>
July 2010
</td>
<td>
In Service
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 57%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments o</th>
<th>nly</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Title
</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
<td>
Approval Status
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate and Destroyers Programme
</td>
<td>
A revised procurement strategy was approved as part of the Review Note in September 2008. The key elements comprise a single contract on BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd for the design and installation aspects with a Foreign Military Sales Case for Co-operative Engagement Capability equipment buy and support. The updated procurement strategy is in draft prior to the Main Investment decision.
</td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">
Description
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">
The planned support strategy forms part of the procurement strategy which will be endorsed at the Main Investment decision. The support strategy assumes two main elements:
the United States core Cooperative Engagement Capability to be supported via a Foreign Military Sales case; the UK element to be supported by a Contractor Logistic Support contract with UK Industry.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Title</td>
<td>
Contractor
</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

UNITED KINGDOM CO-OPERATIVE ENGAGEMENT CAPABILITY FRIGATES AND DESTROYERS PROGRAMME B <u>Section B: Cost</u>

# B.1 Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/
Increment Title</td>
<td>
Approved Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>as a

proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
<td>Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate and Destroyers Programme</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>53</td>
<td>+28</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>53</td>
<td>+28</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B.2 Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate and Destroyers Programme</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B.6 Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</th>
<th>In-year expenditure (£m)</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>53</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>52</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>53</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

UNITED KINGDOM CO-OPERATIVE ENGAGEMENT CAPABILITY FRIGATES AND DESTROYERS PROGRAMME C <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

# C.1 Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate and Destroyers Programme</td>
<td>May 2000</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C.2 Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate and Destroyers Programme</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet
