---
year: 2006.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: INDIRECT FIRE PRECISION ATTACK (IFPA)
page_from: 171.0
page_to: 172.0
project_label: Indirect Fire Precision Attack
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2006_171_172.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

INDIRECT FIRE PRECISION ATTACK(IFPA)

Picture not available

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE ARTILLERY WEAPONS SYSTEMS

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

Indirect Fire Precision Attack (IFPA) will provide a suite of munitions for indirect precision attack of static, mobile, and manoeuvring targets, by incremental acquisition, extending to ranges in excess of 150 kilometres by 2015.

The capability required under IFPA will be delivered through a structured programme of Assessment, Demonstration, and Manufacture phases. In light of the incremental approach, a revised approach to seeking approval has been agreed since MPR05 whereby approval of the overall IFPA strategy will be sought followed by the procurement of individual components via a series of Main Gate Business Cases.

The Assessment Phase (AP) is indicating that the IFPA capability is expected to be achieved by a mixture of guided rockets, enhanced artillery shells and probably loitering munitions (LM), using a variety of different payloads (Loitering munitions are unmanned airborne vehicles with a warhead, designed to fly in a holding pattern after launching until deployed with a man-in-the-loop controller to a target.). IFPA munitions will be used by the Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS), the AS90 selfpropelled howitzer, the future Lightweight Mobile Artillery Weapon System (LIMAWS) Rocket Launcher and Gun and in the case of LM possibly as a stand-alone platform. The mix of munitions procured under the programme will have a range of In Service Dates, commencing with 155mm Ballistic Sensor Fused Munition in 2009.This multi-solution approach will be managed through an incrementally based procurement strategy.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e Main gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Initial Gate Business Case for IFPA was approved in May 2001. Following competition using a Capability Based Questionnaire, an Assessment Phase contract was awarded in May 2002 to a consortium of companies led by BAE Systems Future Systems. The Assessment Phase was designed

to provide, and iteratively update, a ‘Route Map’ to achieving the full IFPA capability with recommendations about the type, quantities and mix of munitions.

Invitations to Tender covering a Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration programme and a

165

155mm Ballistic Sensor Fused Munition Demonstration and Manufacture phase contract were issued in July 2005.

In light of the incremental procurement strategy, procurement of individual components will be approved via a series of Main Gate Business Cases.

It should be noted that the Forecast Cost of the Assessment Phase at Section 2b below only relates to Assessment work up to the IFPA submission. Assessment activity for later stages will continue long after this submission, due to the incremental nature of the programme. In fact, the bulk of IFPA assessment work will take place only after the IFPA strategy has been approved.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
20
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
24
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-4
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | FROM | TO |
|------------------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| Envelope within which capability will be available                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | \\\   | \\\ |
| This project will provide the MOD with an indirect fire, precision attack capability, to be acquired on an incremental basis to 2015. The above dates relate to the current planning assumptions for the first increment of the IFPA programme, that is, the introduction into service of the 155mm Ballistic Sensor Fused Munition. |          |        |

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
FROM
</th>
<th>
TO
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

166
