---
year: 2009.0
project_type: Pre-Main Investment Decision
project: Helix
page_from: 305.0
page_to: 307.0
project_label: Airseeker
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2009_305_307.md
---
Helix

Team Responsible

Nimrod

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Director Equipment Capability - Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance

Senior Responsible Officer

Director Equipment Capability - Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision - Helix

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

Project Helix seeks to sustain the UK’s airborne electronic surveillance capability, currently provided by the Nimrod R1 aircraft and associated ground elements, against an evolving and increasingly complex target set up to 2025. It will provide a rapidly deployable capability to support operations where it will be able to collect, analyse, fuse and disseminate a coherent and readily interpretable electronic surveillance picture in support of national, joint and coalition operations. This information will support targeting and combat identification.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

The original concept of the Project was for the procurement of a modern mission system to fit into existing Nimrod R1 aircraft, ground analysis facilities, training facilities and established support solution to the planned Out of Service Date of 2025.

The Project received Initial Gate approval in August 2003. Eight contractors were invited to participate in a capability-based assessment and three were chosen to go forward to a competitive-based three-stage Assessment Phase in April 2004.

The first stage required the contractors to show their understanding of the requirement, and resulted in a down-select to two contractors in April 2005.

In the second stage the remaining two contractors were required to define the system to meet the capability, proving their design through operational effectiveness modelling. This resulted in a downselect to a preferred contractor in April 2007.

When the down-selected contractor commenced the final stage of the Assessment Phase, a risk reduction exercise, it became evident that the cost of supporting the Nimrod R1, as the planned host platform, was likely to be significantly greater than anticipated.

Due to this cost escalation a change in strategy was made in 2008 to focus the remainder of the Assessment Phase on an investigation of an alternative to the Nimrod R1 as the host platform.

## A.3. Progress

The Assessment Phase is nearing completion. As at March 2009 there are three possible options, the earliest of these options allows for an introduction of capability in \\\. It is intended to submit a Main Gate Business Case for approval before \\\.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Loss of the capability to be provided by Project Helix would remove the UK’s ability to conduct airborne electronic surveillance in the future. UK forces would be denied the ability to acquire timely intelligence from increasingly complex electronic sources. This would significantly reduce the ability to acquire, process and disseminate signals, communications and electronic intelligence to UK and coalition partners. Critically, the principal source of tactical data essential to the nature of current operations would be lost, substantially reducing the ability to conduct effective targeting and information operations.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 7%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th colspan="5">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Description</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="4">
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Helix
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="4">
Competitive Assessment Phase - expanded to consider other options.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="5">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>
Contractor
</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a proportion of total

estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Helix</td>
<td>44</td>
<td>41</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Helix</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost – not applicable

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not applicable

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual Date of Main Gate

Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Helix</td>
<td></td>
<td>
August 2003
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In Service Date - not applicable

## C.4. Initial Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.6. Support / Service / PFI Contract - not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels – not applicable

## D.2. Performance against Lines of Development – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures – not applicable
