---
year: 2010.0
project_type: Post-Main Gate Projects
project: Astute Class Submarines
page_from: 70.0
page_to: 87.0
project_label: Astute Class Submarines
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2010_70_87.md
---
Team Responsible

Submarine Production

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Capability Deterrent and Underwater

Senior Responsible Officer

Director Submarines

Number of Projects / Increments 7

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Post Main Investment Decision – Astute Boats 1-3 • Post Main Investment Decision – Astute Boat 4 • Pre Main Investment Decision
– Astute Boat 5 • Pre Main Investment Decision – Astute Boat 6 •
Post Main Investment Decision – Astute Support Boats 1-3 • Post Main Investment Decision – Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3 •
Post Main Investment Decision – Astute Class Training Service Boats 4-7

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The military requirement is for up to 8 Astute Class Submersible Ship Nuclear to replace the existing Swiftsure and Trafalgar Classes of nuclear powered attack submarine.

Astute Class submarines are required to perform a range of military tasks; these unique requirements are combined within the Astute design to provide global reach, endurance, covertness, sustained high speed and the ability to conduct unsupported operations in hostile environments.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

In June 1991 (equivalent of Initial Gate) approval was given to proceed with a programme of studies at an estimated cost of £6m (1991/1992 prices) to define the Batch 2 Trafalgar Class Boat (now known as the Astute Class). This programme of studies led to the issue of an Invitation to Tender for the design and build of an initial batch of three Astute Class Submersible Ship Nuclear and a further approval of
£2m (1992/1993 prices) for contractor and Defence Research Agency support to MOD during the tendering exercise in 1994.

In July 1994, as a result of concerns over the overall affordability of the programme, Minister (Defence Procurement) and the Treasury approved a further £24m (at 1993/1994 prices) for risk reduction studies to be undertaken in parallel with the formal bid phase of the project. To maintain an effective competition, contracts for risk reduction were awarded to both bidders, GEC Marconi (now BAE Systems (Submarine Solutions)) and Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd.

GEC-Marconi was identified as MOD’s preferred bidder in December 1995. Using the policy of No Acceptable Price No Contract, a Prime Contract was placed in March 1997 for the design, build and in service support of the first three of the Class.

## A.3. Progress

BAE Systems disclosed during 2002 significant delay and projected cost overrun. An agreement between the Department and BAE Systems was reached in February 2003 reducing risk from the production of Boats 2 and 3, and placed new incentives on the company to perform. The Department agreed to increase funding by around £430 million, against an increased contribution by the company of £250 million. An amendment to the Boat 1 contract was signed in December 2003 with Boat 1 continuing on a revised Target Cost Incentive Fee arrangement; Boats 2 and 3 continued on ascertained expenditure (actual cost incurred) pending later pricing .

After the submission of a Review Note in 2007, a further £580m increase was agreed. This was coupled with increased inflationary costs and some programme scheduling assumptions at the Barrow site not being borne out. All the programme’s revised anchor milestones continue to be met and new project management disciplines were implemented. This included agreeing a Target Cost Incentive Fee with a maximum price for each of Boats 2 and 3.

A Review Note was submitted to the Investment Approvals Board seeking re-approval of Boat 1’s In Service Date, the implications of this on the remainder of the Astute Class Programme are under investigation, and was the subject of a separate Review Note in late 2009. Approval was given in December 2007 for long leads items for Boat 5, at a cost of £494M.

Approval for procurement of Boat 4 was given in May 2007

Boat 1, the first of the Astute Class was launched in June 2007. On completion of initial trials Boat 1 returned to the Devonshire Dock Hall for outfitting, which included the installation of the reactor core. During 2008 several technical issues arose, which were compounded by the ten year gap between the Vanguard and Astute Classes and the erosion of the skilled resource at Barrow. Additional resources were applied to the Astute Programme to minimise the impact, but the resolution of the issues has introduced a ten month delay to Boat 1’s In Service Date.

Boat 1, First of Class, sailed from Barrow-in-Furness on 15 November 2009 and into her homeport of HM Naval Base Clyde on 20 November 2009. Boat 1 is now conducting an extensive period of First of Class sea trials prior to formally handing over to the Royal Navy.

During 2009 Boat 1 experienced further technical difficulties completing commissioning and Power

Range Testing of her Nuclear Power Plant; resolution of which was slowed by lack of Nuclear Suitably Qualified & Experienced Personnel in Industry. Power Range Tasking completed in October 2009 and, following demonstration of crew readiness, Boat 1 sailed for sea trials in November 2009 (4.5 months late to plan). Early sea trials exposed technical problems that have required modifications before recommencing sea-trials in February 2010.

The In service Date for Boat 1 is now expected in July 2010 on completion of further trials.

Boat 2 started the early stages of reactor systems commissioning during 2009. As resource for this work is common Boat 2 has experienced significant delays in year as a result of this resource being retained on Boat 1. Progress on Boat 3 and initial build of Boat 4 has been less affected by delays to Boat 1.

A savings measure option was taken in 2009 to remove £139M of funding from Astute Boats 2-7 in years 2009/10 to 2012/13. These savings result in delayed delivery of Boats 2-4, which are already in build and defer build start dates and the procurement of long lead items for Boats 5-7. As a consequence of this, cost growth occurs in later years as reported in more detail in MPR 09.

There is a risk that the Astute Class Training Service costs could increase over the next year, due to an increased scope of work against Boat 4 with knock on effects to Boats 5-7. This increase cannot yet be quantified but will be the subject of a Review Note over the next year and any increase will be reported in MPR 2011.

Astute has successfully completed full power range testing and deep dive.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Delivery of Boat 1 is critical to attack submarine’s readiness profile. Boat 1’s delay will result in the delayed introduction of improved capability over current classes. The Astute Class will also de-risk capability essential for an affordable Successor deterrent programme.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
Swiftsure &amp; Trafalgar Class Update Final Phase
</td>
<td>
2004
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="4">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td colspan="3">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td colspan="3">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td colspan="3">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td colspan="3">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
BAE Systems (Submarine Solutions) (formerly BAE Systems Electronics Ltd
– Astute Class Project and BAE Systems Astute Class Ltd)
</td>
<td>
Demonstration to In-Service
</td>
<td>
Boat One –
Target Cost Incentive Fee Boats Two &amp;
Three – Target Cost Incentive Fee with Maximum Prices
</td>
<td>
United Kingdom Competition
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
BAE Systems (Submarine Solutions)
</td>
<td>
Boat 4 and Design for Cost Reduction for Boats 4 to 7
</td>
<td>
Limit of Liability for 1<sup>st</sup> three years of seven year build programme. Working towards Inclusion of Target Costs Incentive Fee for whole Boat 4. A Revised procurement strategy for remainder of Astute Class is under development as a component of Submarine Enterprise Performance Programme.
</td>
<td>
Single Source
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
BAE Systems (Submarine Solutions)
</td>
<td>
Boat 5 Long Lead items &amp;
Initial Build
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Single Source
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
BAE Systems (Submarine Solutions)
</td>
<td>
Boat 6 Long Lead Items
</td>
<td>
Limit of Liability placed for Minimum Long Lead Items Scope of Work
</td>
<td>
Single Source
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

### A.7.1. Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">The Initial Astute Support Solution was approved in July 2006; it follows a traditional support model, but recognises Astute’s differences and introduces additional arrangements as appropriate. Provision has been made to employ the build contractor (BAE Systems) as the Astute Technical Authority, MOD will be the Approving Authority, and Nuclear Propulsion Project Team is responsible for the Nuclear Steam Raising Plant. MOD Equipment Project Teams will support specific equipments with Head of In-Service Submarine maintaining a Platform focus and providing the flotilla wide single point of contact for Navy Command. Maintenance at the waterfront will be conducted under existing Warship Support Modernisation Initiative arrangements. The Astute Class Training Service is a Private Finance Initiative contract, initially approved for 36 years to provide Astute specific training to the Royal Navy for Boats 1-3. Approval was given in 2007, to extend to a 38 year contract, to cover the life of Boat 4.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Technical Authority Support Contract
</td>
<td>
BAE Systems
</td>
<td>
Provision of Technical Authority services
</td>
<td>
Firm Price
</td>
<td>
Single Source
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3
</td>
<td>
FAST Training Services Limited;
47.5% owned by BAE Systems, 47.5% owned by L-3 MAPPS and 5% owned by VT Group.
</td>
<td>
Training
</td>
<td>
Private Finance Initiative
</td>
<td>
Competitive tender
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Astute Class Training Service Boat 4
</td>
<td>
FAST Training Services Limited;
47.5% owned by BAE Systems, 47.5% owned by L-3 MAPPS and 5% owned by VT Group.
</td>
<td>
Training
</td>
<td>
Private Finance Initiative
</td>
<td>
Single Source
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>-4</td>
<td>1%</td>
<td>1%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>33</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>-4</td>
<td>1%</td>
<td>1%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / Private Finance Initiative

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
2431
</td>
<td>
2578
</td>
<td>
2730
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
1460
</td>
<td>
1524
</td>
<td>
1610
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
695
</td>
<td>
774
</td>
<td>
855
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
304
</td>
<td>
328
</td>
<td>
351
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 46%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th>Actual /
Forecast cost (£m)</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>In-Year

Variation

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>2578</td>
<td>4041</td>
<td>+1463</td>
<td>+108</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>1610</td>
<td>1567</td>
<td>-43</td>
<td>-22</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>855</td>
<td>735</td>
<td>-120</td>
<td>-120</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>351</td>
<td>334</td>
<td>-17</td>
<td>-17</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>5394</td>
<td>6677</td>
<td>+1283</td>
<td>-51</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation against approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>+22</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Prime contract increases (a mixture of overheads, materials and labour). (+£31m). Non Prime decrease (a mixture of combat systems, nuclear power management, safety platform and design and other non construction costs) (-£9m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>+79</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Notional cost of capital increase due to revised cost and delivery profiles.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>December 2009</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>Receipts</td>
<td>
Increase in receipt for Shipbuilders Relief (-£2m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>November 2009</td>
<td>+9</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
A savings option, Defer Successor (Future Deterrent) In Service Date and modify the build programme of later Astute hulls, was taken in Planning Round 2010 which increases the cost of Astute Boats 1-3 by £9m
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+40</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Prime increases (a mixture of labour, materials, sub-contractors and risk/indemnity/warranty and other construction costs) (+£76m). Non Prime decrease (a mixture of combat systems, nuclear power management, safety platform and design and other non construction costs) (-£36m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>Receipts</td>
<td>
Reduction in receipt for Shipbuilders Relief (+£3m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+87</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
A savings option was taken in the 2009 Planning Round which removed
£139M of funding over the
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>4 years from 2009/10 from the Astute Boats 2-7 build programme, the consequent programme slippage results in additional cost growth in later years of £539m. Of this, £87m relates to boats 1-3.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>Accounting

Adjustments and Re-

definitions</td>
<td>Cost of capital reduction as the result of cost variances reported in March 2009 (-£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-192</td>
<td>Accounting

Adjustments and Re-

definitions</td>
<td>Increase in shipbuilders relief (£12m). Cost of Capital effect of adding in creditors and accruals estimates for 2007/08 onwards (£7m). Re-costing of NonAttributable items since MPR06 (Items not Included in the original approval) (+£51m). Overall increase in Cost of Capital due to cost growth In CDEL, changed profile and delivery values (+£65m). Shipbuilders Relief (£58m) and Sunk cost corrections (£3m) made in project account. Decommissioning and Decontamination costs (-£1m). Reallocation of Pension cost increases since MPR05 (-
£5m).Overall reduction in Interest on Capital due to changed delivery profile and values (-£16m). Recosting of Non-Attributable items since MPR07 (i.e. those items not included in original approval) (+£28m). Shipbuilders Relief correction (+£6m). Variation in cost of capital charge in March 2008 due to revised cost and delivery profiles (+£8m). Recosting of NonAttributable items since MPR05 (items not included in the original approval) (+£29m). Removal of items wrongly attributed to Astute Approval in previous years (£11m). Decrease reflects difference between anticipated resource profile at approval and current profile (Equipment Plan 2001) (-£74m). Removal of Astute Class Training Service costs that have been incorrectly included in previous MPRs – training not part of original Astute Main Gate approval (-£62m).Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£89m). Removal of items wrongly attributed to Astute Approval in previous Years (-£41m).Variation in Cost of Capital charge due to revised cost and delivery profiles.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+257</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirement</td>
<td>Includes change to fore end design, completion of land attack missile capability and improved</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>tactical data link capability (+£32m). Additional Capability originally part of Astute second buy which has been brought forward into the first buy (+£225m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+39</td>
<td>Procurement Process</td>
<td>BAE Systems to forego any incentive payments on Boat One(£13m). Reduction in Warranty to be provided by BAE Systems from three years to one year (-£3m). Planned Contract Amendments (+£55m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+40</td>
<td>Inflation</td>
<td>Variation between anticipated rates for GDP and Variation on Price on contract (sunk costs only) (+£14m). Correction in previous Variation on Price calculation – incorrect split between labour and materials (+£26m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+1084</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Cost of Capital reduction in respect of removal of Sustainability Costs (£23m). Sustainability costs of maintaining submarine build capability removed (-£204m). Impact on Cost of Capital of Boat 3 Delivery advance of one year due to compressed sea trials (-£30m). Option E07UW178S – capability reduction to a 7 Boat Astute Programme, taken in Equipment Plan 2007 (-£29m). Option E07UW601S – compress Astute class Boats1-3 sea trials programme, taken in EP07 (-£3m). Cost Growth from Review Year 06 to EP07. Materials (+£164m), Labour (+£68m), GDP (+£65m), Risk (+£50m), Profit (+£7m), NonPrime (-£66m), Overhead (-£12m), Shipbuilder Relief (+£58m). Cost growth in provision of some elements of nuclear safety cases (+£17m). Departmental review identified savings opportunities within other elements of nuclear safety cases (-£20m). Increase in cost as a result of the reassessment of risk, specifically, Team Leader challenge in MPR05 (+£123m). Cost increase identified as part of the Integrated Project Team’s internal review in 2005/06 Prime Contract Overheads (+£97m), Prime Contract Materials (+£61m), Prime Contract Labour (+£26m) and unallocated cost growth (+£21m). Changes in throughput assumptions between MPR05 and MPR06 (-£73m). Reduced Requirement for Technology Insertion post MPR05 (CDEL -£17m, cost of capital (£1m). Prime Contract pricing assumptions and changes to</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>costing (+£19m). Reassessment of risk (+£51m). Reduction of risk on Sonar 2076 programme (-£16m). Re-costing of land attack missile interface &amp; integration (+£5m). Recosting of External communications (+£5m). Increase in overall BAE Systems base costs (shipyard and sub contracts) reflecting a reestimate as well as cost of delay (+£571m). Increase in risk provision owing to technical complexity (+£152m). Changed cost reflecting Astute Agreement of February 2003 (+£52m). Reassessment of overhead rates used in costing (-£36m).Man-hour reduction on Prime contract (£20m).Removal of Risk funding post Boat 3 delivery (-£2m). Expenditure not apportionable to specific elements of the programme due to 2007 budgeting baseline being overstated which has subsequently been corrected (+£25m). Prime increase (+£27m). Non Prime decrease (-£28m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+1463</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.1.2. Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-26</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Prime contract decrease. (A mixture of labour overheads, materials and VAT). (-£25m). Non Prime contract decrease. (A mixture of Combat systems and Nuclear. (-£1m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Cost of capital decrease as the result of the above cost variances (-£6m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>November 2009</td>
<td>+10</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
A savings option to defer Successor (Future Deterrent) In Service date and modify the build programme of later Astute hulls, was taken in Planning Round 2010 which increases the cost of Boats 4-7 by £322m. Of this, £10m relates to Boat 4.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+102</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
A savings option was taken in the 2009 Planning Round which removed
£139M of funding over the 4 years from 2009/10 from the Astute Boats 2-7 build programme, the consequent programme slippage results in additional cost growth in later years of £539m. Of this, £102m relates to boat 4.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-5</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Cost of capital reduction as the result of above cost variances (£5m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+19</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Increase in Build, Nuclear Plant and Safety costs (+£19m).
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Historic

Receipt

-51

VAT Receipt relating to sunk costs

£51m).

(-

Historic

-86

Risk Differential

The difference between the risk

allowed for in the most likely (50%)

and highest acceptable (90%).

Net Variation

-43

### B.3.1.3. Boat 5

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>November 2009</td>
<td>+11</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
A savings option to defer Successor (Future Deterrent) In Service date and modify the build programme of later Astute hulls, was taken in Planning Round 2010 which increases the cost of Boats 4-7 by £322m. Of this, £11m relates to Boat 4.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-15</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Reduction in the expected cost of Boat 5 reactor core.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-33</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
The variance of £32m generated between the expected cost outturn of Boat 5 and the relevant Boat 5 approval results from the Boat redesign activities, an element of which have been approved against Boats 4 and 5, as a batch solution, but are contracted for solely against Boat 4. As the re-design work is a batch solution BAE have not been able to provide costs on a Boat by Boat basis which would align with separate IAB approvals. Sunk Costs have therefore been scored against the Boat 4 within the Submarine Project Team accounts which has created the variation between outturn boat costs and boat approval for Boat 5.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Cost of capital decrease as the result of above cost variances.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-81</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>
The difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-120</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.1.4. Boat 6

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Revised estimate of cost of the Nuclear Reactor Core for Astute Boat 6.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>+8</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Cost of Capital increase due to revaluation of closing net assets against the Boat 6 Nuclear Reactor Core
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-23</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>
The difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) against the Boat 6 Long Lead items.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-17</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacturing Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 67%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.4. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th colspan="2">
Unit production costs (£m)
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities required
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</th>
<th>
Currently
</th>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</th>
<th>
Currently
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
3
</td>
<td>
3
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
1610
</td>
<td>
1567
</td>
<td>
1
</td>
<td>
1
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 46%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Cost</th>
<th>Forecast cost</th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>In-Year Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Initial Astute Support Solution</td>
<td>331</td>
<td>273</td>
<td>-58</td>
<td>-25</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3</td>
<td>182</td>
<td>588</td>
<td>+406</td>
<td>-3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Class Training Service Boat 4</td>
<td>260</td>
<td>267</td>
<td>+7</td>
<td>+7</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.5.1. Cost Variation against approved Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Cost

### B.5.1.1. Initial Astute Support Solution Date Variation (£m) Factor Reason for Variation

Cost reduction due to not needing

March 2010 -25 Technical Factors to support boats as a result of

slippage. (-£25m).

Cost reduction due to not needing

-18 Technical Factors to support boats as a result of

Historic

slippage. (-£18m).

Accounting Cost of capital charge decrease

Historic -15 Adjustments and resulting from changed delivery

Re-definitions profiles. (-£15m).

Net Variation -58

### B.5.2. Cost Variation against approved Increment A

### B.5.2.1. Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Re-assessment of costs. (-£1m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Reduction in amount of recoverable VAT due to re-assessment of costs. (-£1m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+357</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Re-assessment of costs for training/policy changes.(+£14m). Re-alignment of Astute Class Training Service to the revised Astute Boat Programme and extending the contract from 25 to 36 years. (+£343m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+83</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Addition of recoverable VAT to ensure that the forecast cost is consistent with the approved cost.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-31</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>
The difference between the risk
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest (90%) estimates approved at Main Gate..</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>
+406
</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.5.2.2 Astute Class Training Service Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>+7</td>
<td>
Technical factors
</td>
<td>
Re-assessment of Private Finance Initiative costs. (+£5m). Extension of FAST Training Services Ltd infrastructure costs. (+£3m). Other minor decreases. (-£1m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+7</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.5.3. Operational Impact of Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Cost Variations

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 62%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Programme / Project</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.6. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Previous expenditure to 31 March 2009</th>
<th>In-year expenditure</th>
<th>Total expenditure to 31 March 2010</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase (£m)</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>29</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</td>
<td>3560</td>
<td>585</td>
<td>4145</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase/Service/Private Finance Initiative Cost (£m)</td>
<td>97</td>
<td>48</td>
<td>145</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure (£m)</td>
<td>3686</td>
<td>633</td>
<td>4319</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>March 1997</td>
<td>June 1991</td>
<td>69</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>May 2007</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
June 2005
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
February 2015
</td>
<td>
August 2015
</td>
<td>103 months from contract signature<a href="fn1"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">The main contract for Boat 4 has not yet been signed. When it is, the approved date will be shown, along with any variation in forecast in service date for Boat 4.<a href="fnref1"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## C.3. In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
In Service Date definition: Contract Acceptance Schedule Stage 1 (safe operation and start of operational work up)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
Original In Service Date definition: Platform and Weapons acceptance against all requirements as defined within the Astute Class Through Life Management Plan, issue 6 dated April 2006. MPR 09 definition: Boat 4 Operational Handover to Fleet Reason for change: To align In Service Date with asset being utilised by Navy Command.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.2. Progress against approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Date</th>
<th>Actual / Forecast Date</th>
<th>Variation</th>
<th>In-Year Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
June 2005
</td>
<td>July 2010</td>
<td>+61</td>
<td>+4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
103 months from contract signature
</td>
<td>
December 2016
</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
+61
</td>
<td>
+4
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.3. Timescale variation

### C.3.3.1. Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>November 2009</td>
<td>+4</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Technical and programme difficulties with Boat 1 First of Class undertaking trials for the first time in 17 years.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+10</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Further delays have occurred during Astute (Boat 1) testing and commissioning phase. These were caused by technical factors the rapid resolution of which was hampered by the lack of skilled personnel with recent submarine testing and commissioning experience.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+47</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Risk analysis, taking into account opportunities to reduce construction time, predicts most likely In-Service Date of November 2008 (-1 month). Risk analysis, taking in to account opportunities to reduce construction time, predicts a most likely In-Service Date of December 2008 (-1 month). Exceptional difficulties arose with the introduction of a computer aided design system, the availability of trained staff and project management (+43 months). Effect of technical problems assessed a six month slip in InService Date (completion of the first phase of sea trials) (+6
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

months).

Net Variation

+61

### C.3.3.2. Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.3.3. Boat 5

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.3.4. Boat 6

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.4. Other costs resulting from Timescale variation

Description

Date

£m (+ Cost / -

Saving)

Factor

Reason for

expenditure or

saving

Support costs and current

equipment

\-

\-

\-

Costs from this

delay have

been factored

and subsumed

into the

Department’s

revised

assessment of

Force Level

Requirements.

Other

\-

\-

\-

Costs from this

delay have

been factored

and subsumed

into the

Department’s

revised

assessment of

Force Level

Requirements.

-

-

Total

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
The Astute delay will result in the delayed introduction of improved capability over current classes; such as improved detection, greater weapon load and increased availability. Since these delays the Department has fully considered the plans for submarine capability in the light of this and many other factors.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
Reduced ability to fulfil Fleet tasking.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
FOC will be declared following Operational Workup and agreement on any outstanding requirements / Defect and Deficiency Database issues post Contract Acceptance Schedule Stage 2.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
FOC will be declared following Operational Workup and agreement on any outstanding requirements / Defect and Deficiency Database issues post Contract Acceptance Schedule Stage 2.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
FOC will be declared following Operational Workup and agreement on any outstanding requirements / Defect and Deficiency Database issues post Contract Acceptance Schedule Stage 2.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
FOC will be declared following Operational Workup and agreement on any outstanding requirements / Defect and Deficiency Database issues post Contract Acceptance Schedule Stage 2.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.4.2. Progress Report

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.5. Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Contract

### C.5.1. Scope of Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Initial Astute Support Solution</td>
<td>
The BAE Systems contracted element of the Initial Astute Support Solution provides Design Management of the Astute Platform; maintenance of the Safety Case, configuration management of the design including design change and maintenance of the Certificate of Design.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Class Training Service</td>
<td>
The Astute Class Training Service is a Private Finance Initiative contract to provide Astute specific team and individual training to the Royal Navy for Boats 1-3. Approval was given in 2007, to extend to a 38 year contract, to cover the life of Boat 4.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.5.2. Progress against approved Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Contract GoLive Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Date</th>
<th>Actual Date</th>
<th>Variation (month)</th>
<th>In-Year Variation (month)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Initial Astute Support Solution</td>
<td>August 2007</td>
<td>May 2007</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
February 2004
</td>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>+49</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Class Training Service Boat 4</td>
<td>December 2013</td>
<td>July 2012</td>
<td>-18</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.5.2.1. Go-Live Date Variation – Initial Astute Support Solution

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>
The difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.5.2.2. Go-Live Date Variation – Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th></th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+50
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Re-alignment of Astute Class
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Training Service to the revised Astute Boat Programme.

The difference between the risk

Historic -1 Risk Differential allowed for in the most likely (50%)

and highest acceptable (90%)

Net Variation +49

### C.5.2.3. Go-Live Date Variation – Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-4

Date Variation Factor Reason for Variation

To offset the risk of design

Changed changes, increased training

Historic -18

requirement throughput and to ensure retention of key supplier resources.

Net Variation -18

### C.5.3. Progress against approved End of Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Contract Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Date</th>
<th>
Actual Date
</th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>In-Year Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Initial Astute Support Solution Project</td>
<td>December 2012</td>
<td>
December 2012
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3</td>
<td>September 2026</td>
<td>
September 2037
</td>
<td>
+132
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute class Training Service Boat 4</td>
<td>September 2039</td>
<td>
September 2039
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.5.3.1. End of Contract Date Variation

Date Variation Factor Reason for Variation

Re-alignment of Astute Class

Historic +72 Technical Factors Training Service to the revised

Astute Boat Programme.

Decision to extend contract by 5 Procurement

Historic +60 years to obtain better value for

Processes

money.

Net Variation +132

### C.5.4. Operational Impact of Support / Service / Private Finance Initiative Support Contract variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Boats 1-3</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 4</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 5</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Boat 6</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

### D.1.1. Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Maturity Area</th>
<th>Maturity Scale</th>
<th>Last Years Assessment</th>
<th>Current Assessment</th>
<th>Comments</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Commercial</td>
<td rowspan="3"></td>
<td colspan="3" rowspan="3">
<em>Measures under development</em>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Financial</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Project Management</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Readiness</td>
<td>1-9</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
System Readiness levels are not currently mandated for approvals
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Technology Readiness</td>
<td>1-9</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
Readiness Levels were not
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>required when this project passed through Main Gate</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.1.2. Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Maturity Area</th>
<th>Maturity Scale</th>
<th>Last Years Assessment</th>
<th>Current Assessment</th>
<th>Comments</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Commercial</td>
<td rowspan="3"></td>
<td colspan="3" rowspan="3">
<em>Measures under development</em>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Financial</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Project Management</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Readiness</td>
<td>1-9</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
System Readiness levels are not currently mandated for approvals
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Technology Readiness</td>
<td>1-9</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
Readiness Levels were not measured when this project passed through Main Gate
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.2. Performance against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="4">
Not required for pre-Main Investment Decision Projects
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">
Line of Development
</td>
<td rowspan="2">Description</td>
<td colspan="2">Forecast</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
To be met
</td>
<td>
At Risk
</td>
<td>
Not to be met
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>01 Equipment</td>
<td>
The provision of the platform and equipment/systems to meet the user requirement.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02 Training</td>
<td>
Delivery of trained submarine crew and support personnel, by the enduring provision of sufficient and suitable facilities, training media and instructors.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03 Logistics</td>
<td>
Capability being sustained in order that Astute Class can meet allocated military tasks in peacetime, conduct a transition to war and operate effectively in time of conflict.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04 Infrastructure</td>
<td>
How Astute Class will operate and interface with naval real estate such as dockyards, ammunition facilities, pilots and ranges.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05 Personnel</td>
<td>
The provision of trained people. Acceptance of the manning solution will be a staged process.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06 Doctrine</td>
<td>
Expression of the principles by which military forces guide their actions and is a codification of how activity is conducted today.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07 Organisation</td>
<td>
The Forces Structures component of Military Capability for Astute is measured against the number of vessels in the class and their readiness state against the requirement of the Royal Naval Plan
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08 Information</td>
<td>
The provision of a coherent development of data, information and knowledge requirements for capabilities and all processes designed to gather and handle data.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td colspan="2">
100%
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Line of Development</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>Training</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Training is at risk due to the extent of Boat design changes and the potential impact of these changes to Astute Class Training Service. Mitigation is that Astute Class Training course delivery has been prioritised to meet the known requirement and essential safety training updates are being optimised with the training delivery.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>December 2009</td>
<td>Logistics</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Logistics no longer considered at risk. Boat programme slippage has allowed logistics to catch up.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historical</td>
<td>Logistics</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Risk remains to the support solution during the Transition phase from manufacture into service and in providing the initial provision of spares to the first of class.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Boats 1-3

### D.3.1.1. Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
KPM
</th>
<th rowspan="2">
LOD
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th></th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>To be met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>
1 to 7
</td>
<td>
Weapon system effectiveness
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>
1 to 7
</td>
<td>
Sonar performance
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>
1, 3
</td>
<td>
Hull strength (survivability)
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>
1,2,3, 5
</td>
<td>
Top speed
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>
1, 3
</td>
<td>
Endurance
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>
1,2,3, 4,5,8
</td>
<td>
Acoustic signature
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>
3, 5
</td>
<td>
Complement
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>
1 to 8
</td>
<td>
Land attack capability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>09</td>
<td>
1 to 8
</td>
<td>
Special forces capability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td>100%</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation – Not applicable

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of variation – Not applicable

### D.3.2. Boat 4

### D.3.2.1. Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
KPM
</th>
<th rowspan="2">
LOD
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th></th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>To be met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>
1,2,4, 5,6,7,

8</td>
<td>
Intelligence and Surveillance
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>
1,2,3, 4,5,8
</td>
<td>
Interoperability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>
1,2,3, 4,5,6,

8</td>
<td>Sustained Global Reach</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>
1 to 8
</td>
<td>Theatre Mobility</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>
1 to 8
</td>
<td>Mission Flexibility</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>
1 to 8
</td>
<td>Force and Power Projection</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>
1 to 8
</td>
<td>Battlespace Dominance</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>1,2,3, 5,8</td>
<td>Survivability</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>09</td>
<td>
1 to 5
</td>
<td>Generation</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10</td>
<td>
1,3,8
</td>
<td>Through Life Adaptability</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td></td>
<td>100%</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">In-Year Change</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.3.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Measure)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>Interoperability</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Three complementary projects (Naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal, Spearfish Upgrade and Astute Capability Sustainment Programme) are still awaiting HM Treasury approval to proceed placing 3 Astute KPMs at risk.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>Battlespace Dominance</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Three complementary projects (Naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal, Spearfish Upgrade and Astute Capability Sustainment Programme) are still awaiting HM Treasury approval to proceed placing 3 Astute KPMs at risk.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>Survivability</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Three complementary projects (Naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal, Spearfish Upgrade and Astute Capability Sustainment Programme) are still awaiting HM Treasury approval to proceed placing 3 Astute Boat 4 KPMs at risk.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.3.2.3. Operational Impact of variation

KPM

Date

Status

Operational impact of variation

\-

\-

\-

\-

\-

\-

\-

\-

Total

-

### D.3.3. Support Contract – Not applicable
