---
year: 2010.0
project_type: Post-Main Gate Projects
project: Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier
page_from: 166.0
page_to: 176.0
project_label: Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2010_166_176.md
---
Team Responsible

CAPITAL SHIPS

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

HEAD OF ABOVE WATER CAPABILITY

Senior Responsible Officer

CAPABILITY MANAGER PRECISION ATTACK

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Post Main Investment Decision – QUEEN ELIZABETH CLASS

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The requirement for the Queen Elizabeth Class was endorsed in the 1998 Strategic Defence Review which identified a continuing need for rapidly deployable forces with the reach and self-sufficiency to act independently of host-nation support. The Strategic Defence Review concluded that the ability to deploy offensive air power would be central to future force projection operations, with carriers able to operate the largest possible range of aircraft in the widest possible range of roles. This analysis was further endorsed by the New Chapter work of 2002 and the Defence White Paper in December 2003. The current Invincible Class of carriers was designed for Cold War Anti-Submarine Warfare operations. With helicopters and a limited air-defence capability provided by a relatively small number of embarked Sea Harriers, it was judged that this capability would no longer meet future United Kingdom requirements. It was therefore decided to replace the Invincible Class with two larger and more capable aircraft carriers. The class’s offensive air power will be provided primarily by the Joint Combat Aircraft. The Joint Force Air Group is an air group comprising of a mix of aircraft, tailored to the mission need; it will typically consist of both fixed and rotary-winged aircraft including joint air assets e.g. Joint Combat Aircraft.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

The Class received Initial Gate approval in December 1998 and Invitations to Tender were issued in

January 1999. Following tender evaluation, competitive firm price contracts for the Assessment

Phase, each potentially worth some £30m, were awarded to BAE Systems and Thales UK in November 1999. Initially, the Assessment Phase was broken down into two stages. The first involved the examination of several carrier designs, and helped inform the decision in January 2001 to select the United States Joint Strike Fighter as the option with best potential to meet the Joint Combat Aircraft requirement. Stage 1 completed in June 2001, following which proposals from the contractors for Stage 2 were considered, together with an assessment of their views on the level of work needed to adequately de-risk the programme. After careful consideration, the conclusion was reached that the original two-stage approach no longer offered value for money and the Assessment Phase strategy was changed.

The competitive second stage was revised and shortened (completing in November 2002) and enabled the competing contractors to concentrate on refining their designs and taking key trade-off decisions. An innovative Continuous Assessment process was used throughout to evaluate the contractors' performance which led to the conclusion that an alliance approach involving BAE Systems, Thales UK and the Department represented the best approach to Future Aircraft Carrier. The innovative Alliance procurement strategy enabled the full exploitation of the resources and strengths of the alliance participants with the shared objective of improving on agreed performance targets and was announced in January 2003. A third stage of assessment was therefore taken forward on this basis to further increase the maturity of the design and determine the alliancing strategy for Future Aircraft Carrier. Stage 3 completed in March 2004.

In July 2004, the Assessment Phase was extended into Stage 4 to further mature the design and carry out risk reduction work, to ensure that the best technical & procurement solution was achieved.

Alliancing principles were agreed with BAE Systems and Thales UK and further developed with the selection in February 2005 of Kellogg, Brown
& Root UK Ltd as an additional participant in the Alliance. The timescale for completing the design and risk reduction work was further extended in

August 2005 (into Stage 5) although this did not result in any additional cost to the programme. The

Assessment Phase completed at the end of January 2006 at a revised total cost of £331m[^1], (following receipt of Interim Cost Certificates[^2]
from the alliance participants). Final Assessment Phase figure will be confirmed upon receipt of Final Cost Certificates.

## A.3. Progress

Following direction from the Investment Approvals Board, the project has adopted an incremental approach to Main Gate approval with the Demonstration and Manufacturing Phases being divided into two sequential Main Gate approval points. The first phase (Demonstration), which included expanding the alliance to include Babcock Engineering Services and VT Shipbuilding, was approved by the Investment Approvals Board and Treasury in December 2005. The total cost of the

Demonstration Phase (excluding Indirect Resource Departmental Expenditure Limit, but including non recoverable VAT) was approved at
£297m (not to exceed). The Demonstration Phase activity completed in mid 2008 with total expenditure to 31^st^ March of £266m. The second and final Main Gate approval, to proceed with the Manufacturing Phase of the project was announced by Secretary of State on 25^th^ July 2007 at a not to exceed cost of £3900m including the capitalised Assessment Phase costs and Demonstration Phase costs.

In March 2006, the UK agreed a Memorandum of Understanding that provides for the supply to France of a common baseline design data pack to enable French industry to bid for the design, manufacture and support of one Future Aircraft Carrier (France). France has paid an initial entry fee and contributed to the costs of the UK Demonstration Phase.

At the time of the Main Gate in 2007, the build strategy called for one of the Lower Blocks to be constructed at the BAE Systems Submarines yard in Barrow-In-Furness. BAE Systems needed to build a new facility - the Central Assembly Shop - in order to accommodate the construction of the block. It was envisaged at the time that the facility would also be beneficial to the future submarine programme. MOD authorised BAE Systems to begin site work in June 2007. In July 2008 the Alliance Management Board agreed to the reallocation of Lower Block 3 to the A&P Tyne yard on a

‘best for project’ basis and in December 2008 the Aircraft Carrier Alliance formally instructed BAE Systems to terminate the contract and fully justify any incurred costs. It was hoped that the work carried out in Barrow would be of use to the future submarine programme, however this did not come to fruition which led to a write-off of £8m in Financial Year 2009-10.

Following Main Gate approval the project moved into the Engineering Transition Phase, an extension of the Demonstration Phase to encompass the period prior to contract signature. On 3^rd^ July 2008 a contract was signed with BVT Surface Fleet for the manufacture of the two carriers together with signature of an Alliance Agreement with all members of the alliance.

On 11 December 2008, Ministers announced the outcome of MOD’s Equipment Examination including the intention to re-profile the Queen Elizabeth Class project to meet near term priorities and improve the scope of alignment with the Joint Combat Aircraft programme. The re-profiling measure removed £450M from years 1 to 4 and delayed In Service Dates by 1 and 2 years. The cost estimates of the impact of the Examination on the project were approved by the MOD in February 2010.

The first cut of steel took place in July 2009 at the Govan shipyard in Glasgow, and manufacture is underway in five UK shipyards: Babcock Rosyth and Appledore, BAE System Govan, Portsmouth and A&P Tyne. This work will expand to the final shipyard in 2010. Current In Service Date estimates are May 2016 for HMS Queen Elizabeth and December 2018 for HMS Prince Of Wales.

During 2009 a number of significant milestones were achieved:
completion of No.1 dock at Rosyth; delivery of an upper deck section from Appledore to Rosyth; delivery of the Highly Mechanised Weapon Handling System and the delivery of Emergency Diesel Generators.

In addition the preparations and equipment procurement have proceeded with equipment subcontracts placed to date in excess of £1000m, at the close of the Financial Year in March the bow of the Queen Elizabeth departed from Appledore for Rosyth.

The Aircraft Carrier Alliance acknowledged that there was a requirement to reduce costs at the time of contract award on the basis that concerted management action in the early years of the project would allow this to reduce. In the event, the disruption caused by initial recosting activity and then the Equipment Examination prevented successful delivery of the originally planned cost reduction - as this would not be achieved, MoD considered it prudent to formally recognise this in its revised estimate.

At the end of March 2010 the Final Target Cost figure for the Queen Elizabeth Class was estimated to be £5254m, giving a total forecast cost of £5900m including associated cost of capital. Negotiations are ongoing and the contractual Final Target Cost is due to be agreed with the Aircraft Carrier Alliance by December 2010.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Class is, together with Joint Combat Aircraft, Maritime Airborne Surveillance & Control and Maritime Auxiliary Replenishment Ships, an essential element of the Carrier Strike programme: the ability to project air power from the sea and capable of projecting the full level of medium scale offensive air effort and precision strike from the sea. Medium scale is defined as a deployment of brigade size or equivalent for warfighting or other operations. An example would be our contribution to the NATO-led Intervention Force in Bosnia.

Joint Combat Aircraft Maritime capability depends on the Queen Elizabeth Class to achieve Carrier Strike.

Risks associated with the final achievement and successful delivery of Carrier Strike are held and managed by Senior Responsible Officer (Carrier Strike) and managed on his behalf by the 1\ Carrier Strike Co-ordination Group. The Individual Project Teams manage risks to the timely delivery of their component parts of this larger capability but not the final outcome. Queen Elizabeth Class Risks are managed via the standard risk process with any holistic Carrier Strike issues being elevated through standard Through Life Capability Management route.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class Infrastructure Project Harrier GR7/9 FOC Flying trials Defence Information Infrastructure Medium Range Radar Queen Elizabeth Class In-Service Support Solution</td>
<td>
Queen Elizabeth Class Infrastructure Project Harrier GR7/9 FOC Flying trials Defence Information Infrastructure Medium Range Radar Carrier In Service Support
</td>
<td>
2015 2016 2010/2011 2012 2015
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="4">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class In Service Support</td>
<td colspan="3">To be determined</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procuremen t Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>
BAE Systems Insyte/
Thales/ Kellogg Brown &amp; Root (KBR)/
VT Shipbuilding/
Babcock Support Services / BAE Systems Marine
</td>
<td>
Demonstration Phase
</td>
<td>
Target cost incentive (subsequently, from July 2007 the Engineering Transition Stage as cost reimbursement)
</td>
<td>
Non-
competitive
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
BVT Surface Fleet Thales/ BAE Systems Marine/
BAE Systems Insyte/
Babcock Marine
</td>
<td>
Manufacturing Phase
</td>
<td>
Target cost incentive
</td>
<td>
Non-
competitive
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

### A.7.1. Support / Service / PFI Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th colspan="4"></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td colspan="4">
Support deliverables are those elements which are required for the MOD and the Carrier In-Service Support Solution provider to be able to operate and support the Queen Elizabeth Class safely and efficiently beyond Contract Acceptance Date, these will be procured in the main via the Queen Elizabeth Class manufacturing contract on an incremental basis as the support requirements are progressively matured. A programme of work known as the Carrier In-Service Support Solution project to develop and implement a value for money and affordable contracting for performance arrangement to deliver support from the point at which each of the two ships are delivered off contract by the Aircraft Carrier Alliance. The In Service Support project is split into 4 key phases: assessment, demonstration, mobilisation and support delivery. The first of these is the Support Assessment Phase due to complete by the end of 2010. The work is being undertaken jointly between the MOD and Aircraft Carrier Alliance.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Support Assessment Phase
</td>
<td>
Aircraft Carrier Alliance Industrial Participants
</td>
<td>
Assessment Phase in increments
</td>
<td>
Cost reimbursable moving to Target cost.
</td>
<td>
Noncompetitive
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>118</td>
<td>331</td>
<td>+213</td>
<td>1.9%</td>
<td>5.4%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>118</td>
<td>331</td>
<td>+213</td>
<td>1.9%</td>
<td>5.4%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>
3664
</td>
<td>
4085
</td>
<td>
4359
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 46%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th>Actual /
Forecast cost (£m)</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>In-Year

Variation

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>4359</td>
<td>5900</td>
<td>+1541</td>
<td>+767</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>4359</td>
<td>5900</td>
<td>+1541</td>
<td>+767</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Cost Variation against approved Cost of the D&M Phase

### B.3.1.1. Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>January 2010</td>
<td>+190</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Refinement of cost estimate connected to the Equipment Examination (+£190m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2010</td>
<td>+35</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
An £8M reduction on inflation following refinement of estimates against additional costs of £43M for Government Furnished Equipment.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2010</td>
<td>+337</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
At the time of contract award in 2008, there was a cost challenge of £337M which was expected to be fully reduced through cost reduction measures The impact of slowing down the programme prevented these from being deliverd.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2010</td>
<td>+117</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Various factors including: growth in the Bill of Materials and the impact of build strategy changes.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2010</td>
<td>+88</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
The increases of £679m will attract additional IRDEL.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-37</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Impact on IRDEL of removal of Assessment Phase Costs from Demonstration and Manufacture phase forecast.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+234</td>
<td>Budgetary Priorities</td>
<td>
The increases of £674m and £250m will attract additional
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

IRDEL.

Historic

+674

Budgetary

Priorities

Financial Planning Round 2009

resulted in an option that

constrained the Queen Elizabeth

Class in the first 4 years, this will

cause cost growth of £674m over

the life of the project.

Budgetary

-51

Historic

Priorities

Decrease in cost of capital resulting

from the +£250m variation and re-

profiling of project spend.

Historic

+250

Inflation

The Queen Elizabeth Class

contracted Initial Target Cost is set

at April 2006 economic conditions

exposing the MOD to inflation

fluctuations.

The current procurement contracts

were placed during a period

of high inflation and, despite the

current economic downturn,

forecasts covering the whole of the

projects life indicated it was

prudent to allow for an additional

£250m CDEL.

Historic

-22

Accounting

Adjustments and

Re-definitions

Correction to error in original

IRDEL calculation.

Risk

-274

Historic

Differential

Difference between the approved

not to exceed

figure (70%) and the approved

forecast (50%) at

Main Gate.

Net Variation

+1541

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of D&M Phase – Not Applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th colspan="2">
Unit production costs (£m)
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities required
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</th>
<th>
Currently
</th>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</th>
<th>
Currently
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
4267
</td>
<td>
1
</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prince of Wales</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
987
</td>
<td>
1
</td>
<td>
1
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – Not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to date

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Previous expenditure

to 31 March

2009</th>
<th>In-year expenditure</th>
<th>Total expenditure to 31 March 2010</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase (£m)</td>
<td>302</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>306</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</td>
<td>567</td>
<td>490</td>
<td>1057</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure (£m)</td>
<td>869</td>
<td>494</td>
<td>1363</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Section C: Timescale

# C.1 Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>December 2005</td>
<td>
December 1998
</td>
<td>84</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C.2 Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Earliest

Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>
April 2015
</td>
<td>
July 2015
</td>
<td>
October 2015
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C.3 In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
In-Service Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>
<u>In Service Date</u>
Queen Elizabeth Class In Service Dates will be declared by the Customer when the ship is ready to proceed to a full test of the operational capability of the vessel at sea.
<u>Initial Operating Capability</u>
Initial Operating Capability is expected to be declared once the vessel has successfully completed Tier 1 Operational Sea Training and the Operational Readiness Inspection. Operational Sea Training consists of two key phases:
Tier 1 – Basic sea safety and survival at the platform level. Training as an individual and collectively to be safe to operate the platform in any condition. Tier 2 – More comprehensive training as a unit to include the basic warfighting capabilities and more complex emergencies.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.1.2. Progress against approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Date</th>
<th>Actual / Forecast Date</th>
<th>Variation</th>
<th>In-Year Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>
October 2015
</td>
<td>May 2016</td>
<td>+7</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3.2 Timescale variation

### C.3.2.1. Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th></th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+12
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Priorities
</td>
<td>
Ministerial announcement that Queen Elizabeth and Prince Of Wales In Service Dates will be delayed as a result of the Financial Planning Round 2009 option
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
-2
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Priorities
</td>
<td>
Industry and Capital Ship current estimates are that the current schedule contains sufficient flexibility to allow for mitigating actions to be taken.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>
Difference between the approved not to exceed figure (70%) and the approved forecast (50%) at
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Main Gate.

Net Variation

+7

### C.3.3. Other costs resulting from Timescale variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</th>
<th>Date</th>
<th>£m (+ Cost / - Saving)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for expenditure or saving</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Maritime Equipment Systems</td>
<td rowspan="2">Historic</td>
<td rowspan="2">+6</td>
<td rowspan="2">Budgetary Priorities</td>
<td>Ministerial</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="5">announcement that Queen Elizabeth Class In Service Dates will be delayed as a result of the Financial Planning Round 2009 option</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Communication Situation Awareness</td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>Budgetary Priorities</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Naval Electronic Warfare</td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+2</td>
<td>Budgetary Priorities</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>T45 Overhead</td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+63</td>
<td>Budgetary Priorities</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>CVS Run-on Costs</td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+49</td>
<td>Budgetary Priorities</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Total
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>+123</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.4. Operational Impact of In-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>
The potential shortfall in this capability is mitigated by the extension of the current Invincible Class of carriers and additional work being carried out to optimise platform availability for Carrier Strike (delivery of full offensive air effort, at medium scale, from the sea) and Littoral Manoeuvre, e.g. amphibious landings.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Full Operating Capability</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class</td>
<td>
The Full Operational Capability will be largely determined by the combination of Joint Force Air Group elements and the Queen Elizabeth Class Incremental Acquisition Plan. Full Operating Capability will therefore be defined once the Joint Combat Aircraft and Maritime Airborne Surveillance &amp; Control delivery programmes and the Initial Approved Plan are agreed. Full Operating Capability will allow Queen Elizabeth Class to have an embarked Joint Force Air Group and a level of capability equivalent to that declared at Main Gate.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.4.2. Progress Report – Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – Not Applicable 

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1.1 Maturity Measures

## D.1.1 Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Maturity Area</th>
<th>Maturity Scale</th>
<th>Last Years Assessment</th>
<th>Current Assessment</th>
<th>Comments</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Commercial</td>
<td rowspan="3"></td>
<td colspan="3" rowspan="3">
<em>Measures under development</em>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Financial</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Project Management</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Readiness</td>
<td>1-9</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>6</td>
<td rowspan="2">
The first Main Gate detailed the Technological and System readiness and identified that it was sufficiently mature to proceed. However, at the time Technological and System Readiness Levels as a metric were not used. The maturity levels are unchanged from the previous MPR.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Technology Readiness</td>
<td>1-9</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>7</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.1.2. Increment A – Not Applicable

## D.2. Performance against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="4">
Not required for pre-Main Investment Decision Projects
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Line of Development</td>
<td rowspan="2">Description</td>
<td colspan="2">Forecast</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
To be met
</td>
<td>
At Risk
</td>
<td>
Not to be met
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Equipment</td>
<td>
Delivery of 2 Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers to the required Performance Specification.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Training
</td>
<td>
Provision of individual and collective training both ashore and afloat for Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers that delivers the appropriate level of Operational Capability to meet the Readiness Profiles in the Naval Data Book.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Logistics
</td>
<td>
Provision of Support Solution that enables the operational movement and maintenance of Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Infrastructure</td>
<td>
Provision of support infrastructure and facilities in the MOD estate to support Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and their associated equipments and personnel.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Personnel
</td>
<td>
Provision of sufficient, correctly trained and suitably equipped personnel available to participate in commissioning, trials and handover of the ship, then subsequent operation of the ships in service.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Doctrine
</td>
<td>
Provision of framework of practices and procedures to derive the greatest benefit from using the Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers in a range of operations
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>and scenarios.</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Organisation</td>
<td>Establish a robust and deliverable command structure for Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers with correctly qualified personnel in place in time to support the programme</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Information
</td>
<td>Coherent development of data, information and knowledge requirements for Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and all processes designed to gather, handle data and exploit information and knowledge.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.2.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Line of Development</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>January 2010</td>
<td>Infrastructure</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Early cost estimates exceed provision, necessitating further investigation of options to ensure an affordable position.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2010</td>
<td>Information</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
The risks associated with the integration of Joint Combat Aircraft and the Queen Elizabeth Class has been addressed by the Equipment DLoD Steering and Integration Group. Analysis of the interface issues between the aircraft and the ship has been conducted and significant progress has been made in addressing the issues identified. As a result, the integration risk is now assessed as low.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>Information</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Information DLOD remains at risk due to uncertainty over the resolution of Joint Combat Aircraft integration into UK Global Information Infrastructure.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Project

### D.3.1.1. Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
KPM
</th>
<th rowspan="2">
LOD
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th></th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>To be met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 1
</td>
<td>All</td>
<td>
Interoperability – Queen Elizabeth class shall be able to operate with joint/combined forces to deliver a medium scale offensive air effort for power projection, focused intervention and peace enforcement operations
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 2
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Integration – Queen Elizabeth class shall be able to integrate with all elements of joint/combined forces necessary to conduct Strike operations and support ‘agile mission groups’
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 3
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Availability – Queen Elizabeth class shall provide one platform at High Readiness for its principal role of Carrier Strike at medium scale and at Very
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>High readiness for CS small scale focused intervention</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 4
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Deployability – Queen Elizabeth class shall be able to deploy for the operations in the core regions as defined in Defence Strategic Guidance 05</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 5
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Sustainability – Queen Elizabeth class shall be able to conduct deployments away from port facilities for operations lasting 9 months continuously and support air operations for up to 70 days</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 6
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Aircraft Ops – Queen Elizabeth class shall be able to deploy the full medium scale offensive air effort</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 7
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Survivability – Queen Elizabeth class shall achieve a high probability of protection, survival and recoverability against both natural incidents and those threats identified in the Defence Intelligence Scale Threat Statement (Oct 04)</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 8
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Flexibility – The Queen Elizabeth class shall be able to operate and support the full range of defined aircraft and be adaptable such that it could operate air vehicles which require assisted launch/recovery</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 9
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Versatility – Queen Elizabeth class shall be able to deploy agile Mission groups</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">In-Year Change</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – Not Applicable

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of variation – Not Applicable

### D.3.3. Support Contract – Not Applicable

[^1]: See Section B1.4. This is the total capital expenditure and associated Cost of Capital charge. This will be incurred until the first Ship is delivered.

[^2]: Cost certificates are produced by contractors, and are required by the MOD in support of a contract condition Pricing on Ascertained Costs; Post Costing; and Target Cost Incentive Fee Pricing. This is either to assist in the pricing of a contract or to verify costs incurred. The contractor must provide sufficient information to demonstrate costs and incurred and prices paid are fair and reasonable.
