---
year: 2009.0
project_type: Pre-Main Investment Decision
project: UKCEC Frigate and Destroyer Programme
page_from: 329.0
page_to: 332.0
project_label: United Kingdom Co-operative Engagement Capability Frigate  and Destroyers
  Programme
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2009_329_332.md
---
UKCEC Frigate and Destroyer Programme

Project

UK Co-operative Engagement Capability – Frigate and Destroyer Programme

Team Responsible

Joint Sensor and Engagement Networks

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Director of Equipment Capability (Above Water Effects)

Senior Responsible Officer

|     |
|-----|

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision - UK Co-operative Engagement Capability

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The Co-operative Engagement Capability is a United States Naval System fitted to an increasing number of United States assets including ships, aircraft, and Army and Marine Corps land systems. Co-operative Engagement Capability does not replace any single system; rather it optimises war-fighting capabilities inherent in existing and future combat systems.

UK Co-operative Engagement Capability is a UK Network Enabled Capability project which provides an advanced air and missile defence capability by sharing and fusing engagement quality data from suitably equipped platforms to deliver a single, coherent, stable air picture. It will fill the capability gap originally identified in Commander in Chief Fleet’s Military Capability reports and re-affirmed in the Above Water Effects capability audit in 2007, to detect, monitor, and counter Air Warfare threats. It will also reduce a gap in interoperability with the United States.

UK Co-operative Engagement Capability enhances the ability of fitted platforms to work together in detection, tracking and engagement of air targets. This capability represents a major advance in both air and missile defence.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

Operational Analysis conducted during the Concept Phase assessed seven options; Co-operative

Engagement Capability was identified as the only solution capable of meeting capability requirements.

The objective of the Assessment Phase is to establish the most cost effective solution to the requirement for a Co-operative Engagement Capability for Type 23 Frigates and Type 45 Destroyers. It is a proven United States developed programme which the UK is considering purchasing via the Foreign Military Sales process. The UK, with United States assistance, is developing and testing the platform architecture and support and integration aspects, to reduce risk prior to Main Gate.

<u>Assessment Phase 1</u>. Approval for Assessment Phase 1 was received in May 2000 and, following a competition, contracts were placed with Lockheed Martin UK (Integrated Systems) and Raytheon UK, with down-selection to Lockheed Martin (UK) for Assessment Phase 2. This was for the Type 23 Frigate only. Also during this phase a study contract was undertaken by BAE Systems to investigate a Cooperative Engagement Capability fit on the Type 45 destroyer.

<u>Assessment Phase 2</u>. In May 2003 approval was received to accelerate the risk reduction work on Type 45 Destroyer by two years, at no additional procurement cost. In July 2003, this work was placed on contract by means of an amendment to the Type 45 Destroyer prime contract with BAE Systems, the Prime Contracting Office for the Type 45 Destroyer. Costed proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase for both T23 and T45 were delivered by Lockheed Martin (UK) and BAE Systems respectively in 2005. However, an Option was taken as part of the Equipment Plan 2005 planning round extending the Assessment Phase by five years, enabling further de-risking of the project.

<u>Assessment Phase 2b</u>. De-risking study contracts were placed with Lockheed Martin (UK) and BAE Systems to investigate the options for integrating the UK Co-operative Engagement Capability into the two platforms and their existing/planned systems and to produce recommendations for design solutions. This work was successfully completed in March 2008.

<u>Assessment Phase 3</u>. Approval was obtained in September 2008 to proceed with the remaining Assessment Phase work. This covers detailed design and delivery of the Assessment Phase 2b study recommendations for UK Co-operative Engagement Capability system installation and interface on both platforms. The outputs from these activities will support the main investment decision currently forecast for \\\ Further Operational Analysis, a review of technology assumptions since the Initial Gate approval in 2000, and a revised Investment Appraisal have also been commissioned.

## A.3. Progress

A contract was placed on BVT Surface Fleet in January 2009 to complete the design and installation aspects of Assessment Phase 3. The initial design review is scheduled for May 2009, with the final design review in October 2009 to establish the baseline for the Main Investment decision.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Co-operative Engagement Capability is a force multiplier in that it will enable effective Anti Air Warfare and missile defence capabilities with a reduced number of platforms by providing a single, coherent and stable networked air picture. A UK Co-operative Engagement Capability partly mitigates the decision to delete hulls 7 & 8 of the Type 45 Fleet. The effectiveness of such platforms would be significantly diminished if the Co-operative Engagement Capability is not provided.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Type 45 Destroyers</td>
<td>
Type 45 Destroyers
</td>
<td>
2010
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="4">Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
UK Co-operative Engagement Capability
</td>
<td colspan="4">
A revised procurement strategy was approved as part of the Review Note in September 2008. The key elements comprise a single contract on BVT Surface Fleet for the design and installation aspects with assistance from the United States via a Foreign Military Sales agreement. The strategy will be reviewed prior to the Main Investment decision.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
UK Co-operative Engagement Capability
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">The planned support strategy forms part of the procurement strategy which will be endorsed at the Main Investment decision. The support strategy assumes two main elements:
the United States core Cooperative Engagement Capability to be supported via a Foreign Military Sales case; the UK element to be supported by a Contractor Logistic Support contract with UK Industry.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>UK Co-operative Engagement Capability</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a proportion of total

estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>UK Co-operative Engagement Capability</td>
<td>25</td>
<td>53</td>
<td>+28</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase/PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>UK Co-operative Engagement Capability</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost – not applicable

## B.5. Performance against approved Support/PFI Cost – not applicable

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast Date of

Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>UK Co-operative Engagement Capability</td>
<td></td>
<td>
May 2000
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>UK Co-operative Engagement Capability</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In Service Date - not applicable

## C.4. Initial Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.6. Support / Service / PFI Contract - not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels – not applicable

## D.2. Performance against Lines of Development – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures – not applicable
