---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Post-main-gate projects
project: Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
page_from: 137.0
page_to: 147.0
project_label: Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2011_137_147.md
---
| Project Title                       |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme |                                             |
|                                         |                                             |
| Team Responsible                    |                                             |
| Merlin Project Team                     |                                             |
|                                         |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner            |                                             |
| Capability Deterrent and Under Water    |                                             |
|                                         |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name              | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme | Post-Main Investment Decision               |
|                                         |                                             |

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

1.  The Requirement

The Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme will update 30 Merlin Mk1 aircraft to overcome existing and forecast obsolescence within the Weapon System Avionics to ensure sustainment of the required capability until the planned Out of Service Date (2029). The converted aircraft will be known as the Merlin Mk2.

1.  The Assessment Phase

Following approval of the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Initial Gate Business Case, the

Assessment Phase contract was placed in June 2003. The main Assessment Phase activities comprised:

-   Analysis of the User Requirements and development of a consolidated set of system requirements in the form of a Systems Requirement Document.

-   Production of System and Sub-System design requirements, and seeking initial costed proposals from potential suppliers.

-   Conducting trade-off studies to identify the best value solution where options exist.

-   Developing a coherent plan for Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, aligned to other existing and planned Merlin programmes.

-   Undertaking Integrated Test, Evaluation and Acceptance planning.

-   Identification of the risks to the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, and the identification and implementation of mitigation action to reduce the impact to an acceptable level.

-   Produce documentation and costed proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase.

-   Undertaking initial Integrated Logistic Support activities to define a solution compliant with the evolving Support Solution Envelope.

Future Rotorcraft Capability Review

During the Assessment Phase, MOD embarked on a review of all future rotorcraft requirements under the title of the Future Rotorcraft Capability review. The Demonstration & Manufacture Proposal that had been provided by Industry and the associated business case were produced before the impact of the Future Rotorcraft Capability review was known. The Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme was reviewed as part of the wider Future Rotorcraft Capability programme. The Future Rotorcraft Capability programme determined that the balance of financial investment over the first four years of the Equipment Programme between Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme and Lynx Wildcat should be on a 50/50, 30/70, 30/70, 30/70 basis respectively.

To allow Industry to continue critical path activity and to support the reprogramming activities resulting from Future Rotorcraft Capability, the Future Rotorcraft Capability programme provided Transition Phase funding (six months) to the Merlin Integrated Project Team for an extension to the Assessment Phase contract.

A further transition phase (six months) was required to again sustain programme momentum, align it with wider Future Rotorcraft Capability requirements and maintain programme viability during the approvals process.

1.  Progress

Successful achievement of first flight ahead of schedule in November 2010. The first two production aircraft are in the factory at Yeovil (aircraft 5 & 6) and conversion is underway. Initial Provisioning (IP) spares have now been contracted. Programme remains on schedule.

1.  Capability Risks

The Merlin Mk1 is responsible for delivering protection to the Royal Navy’s fleet from sub-surface threats. It also provides a significant contribution to their overall situational awareness both above and below the water. The programme is designed to sustain the capability out to the current Out of Service Date. Without this programme the ability to detect sub-surface threats would be reduced; or if the obsolescence issues were addressed through an alternate strategy (piecemeal approach) lead to a large increase in Through-Life costs.

1.  Associated Projects

2.  Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>Contract Type</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin

Aero Systems Integration Corporation

(Significant (60% by value) sub-

contract with AgustaWestland, Yeovil)</td>
<td>Demonstration and Manufacture</td>
<td>Firm Price until 2010, then fixed price subject to

Variation of Price
</td>
<td>
Non-Competitive prime but ~60% at sub contract level (across both Prime and

AgustaWestland contracts)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\-

1.  Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>The support strategy of the Merlin Mk2 will be the same as that employed for the current UK Merlin (Mk1 &amp; Mk3), namely Integrated Merlin Operational Support contract. Integrated Merlin Operational Support is a whole life aircraft availability contract that is priced by flying hours within a defined band with incentives to generate fit-for-purpose aircraft to the Front Line. There are five key elements of the Integrated Merlin Operational Support Service:
Service Management Aircraft Provision Materiel Support Technical Support Training It is a 25 year contract (commenced in 2006) and priced in five year tranches. The five years to March 2011 has an approval of £M (including Indirect RDEL). The second five year pricing period commencing April 2011 has an approval of £M (including Indirect RDEL). The contract supports the current fleet of 38 Merlin MK1 (reducing to 30 MK2 by the end of this pricing period), 22 Merlin MK3 and 6 Merlin MK3a. It also supports the Merlin MK1 Training System. The Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme will deliver the necessary changes and updates to ensure that Integrated Merlin Operational Support can continue to support Merlin MK2. This includes new Initial Provisioning Spares, new Aircraft Specialist Support Equipment and associated updates to technical publications. At Main Gate for Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme it was identified that during the transition from MK1 to MK2 there would be a potential £45M cost for provision of spares. This was afforded through savings arising during the transition due to reductions in MK1 activity and procured through the support solution. However, savings were subsequently taken and the affordability of the spares procurement was in doubt:
some £12M remained in the budget for aircraft and training sytems spares. In parallel savings were identified in the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme programme of some £29M (due to the termination of the Helicopter Electro-mechanical Actuation Technology element of the programme and reallocation of funding for Aircraft Specialist Support Equipment). This allowed the required spares provision of a total of
£41M, some £4M below the original estimate. Additionally following a risk review and based on lessons learned from other programmes, it was determined that procurement of the spares through the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme contract was lower risk since it ensured that the spares and aircraft build standards were aligned.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Support Title</th>
<th>Contractor</th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Integrated Merlin Operational Support</td>
<td>
AgustaWestland

(Yeovil) primed, with a Lockheed

Martin sub contract
</td>
<td>Support</td>
<td>Firm Price</td>
<td>Single Source</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/
Increment Title</td>
<td>
Approved Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>as a

proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
<td>Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>19</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>3%</td>
<td>2%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Transition Phase for Future Rotorcraft Capability</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1%</td>
<td>1%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>29</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>4%</td>
<td>3%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>798</td>
<td>805</td>
<td>812</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Budgeted For

Cost (£m)</th>
<th>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>In-Year Variation (£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>805</td>
<td>768</td>
<td>-37</td>
<td>-33</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>805</td>
<td>768</td>
<td>-37</td>
<td>-33</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost Variation against approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

1.  Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Category</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>-29</td>
<td>Procurement Processes</td>
<td>Saving made through the reallocation of funds previously attributed to Helicopter Electromechanical Actuation Technology (-£27m) and Aircraft Specialist Support Equipment (£2m) now used to fund the Initial Procurement Spares</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2011
</td>
<td>
-4
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Reduction in outturn costs arising from reduced impact of inflation as a result of earlier than planned completion of work.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-1
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Reduction in outturn costs arising from reduced impact of inflation as a result of earlier than planned completion of work.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Reduction in outturn costs arising from reduced impact of inflation as a result of earlier than planned completion of work.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation (£m)</td>
<td>
-37
</td>
<td>
TRUE
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Unit production cost/Quantities required

2.  Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

3.  Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</th>
<th>In-year expenditure (£m)</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>27</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>27</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>294</td>
<td>120</td>
<td>414</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>321</td>
<td>120</td>
<td>441</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>May 2003</td>
<td>March 2006</td>
<td>34</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>August 2013</td>
<td>February 2014</td>
<td>
September 2014
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

1.  Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 59%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>The Operational Capability of the delivered aircraft shall be such that Commander-in-Chief Fleet (advised by Combined Test Team) are able to declare that Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme is ready for operational deployment in the specified roles. A cumulative total of at least six Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme aircraft delivered to Royal Naval Air Station Culdrose. Logistic support available to enable the operation and maintenance of all the delivered aircraft. Sufficient trained personnel to achieve required capability.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Progress against approved Dates

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Budgeted For Date</th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</th>
<th>
Variation (+/- months)
</th>
<th>In-Year Variation (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>February 2014</td>
<td>February 2014</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Timescale variation

2.  Other costs / savings resulting from Timescale variation

3.  Operational Impact of In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability variation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Full Operating Capability

1.  Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Full Operating Capability</th>
<th>Progress to date</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</td>
<td>Delivery of 30th aircraft</td>
<td>On track</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Support / Service / PFI Contract

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  <u>Section D: Performance</u>

1.  Maturity Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 60%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Sentinel Score</th>
<th>
95% Green
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Performance against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Line of Development</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be met (with risks)
</th>
<th>Not met /
Forecast not to be met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</td>
<td>Delivery of required equipment (aircraft and ground equipment)</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</td>
<td>Delivery of trained people, including training systems</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</td>
<td>Delivery of necessary support products to enable Logistics Support Date to be met</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</td>
<td>Delivery of necessary changes to extant infrastructure to support the required capability</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</td>
<td>Delivery of sufficient people (aircrew and maintainers) to support capability</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</td>
<td>Update Mk1 Concepts &amp; Doctrine to reflect capability delivered through Mk2</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</td>
<td>Review/update organisation to reflect changes caused by introduction of Mk2</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</td>
<td>Manage information and interface to data providers/users, including interface to Defence Information Infrastructure.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Current forecast (with risks)</td>
<td>8 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Last year’s forecast (with risks)</td>
<td>8 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</th>
<th>Category</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>Training &amp; Personnel</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>A number of mitigation measures have been implemented that have reduced the risk. This includes a phased closure approach and additional factory training to ensure sufficient trained people are available to support the required force elements at readiness.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>Training &amp; Personnel</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>Affordability decision taken prior to contract award meant that the ability to train Mk1 personnel concurrently with conversion of the training facilities to the Mk2 standard was not possible. This gives rise to the risk that trained personnel will not be available to sustain Mk1 capability to its out of service and develop those required for Mk2. A number of mitigation activities are underway to minimise the impact of this risk.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures

1.  Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme

1.  Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be met (with risks)
</th>
<th>Not met /
Forecast not to be met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>Equipment and Personnel</td>
<td>Attack. The user shall be able to neutralise confirmed Antisubmarine Warfare Threats.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>Equipment and Training</td>
<td>Deployable Search and Rescue (Maritime Only). The user shall be able to conduct naval Search and Rescue.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>Equipment and Logistics</td>
<td>Environment. The user shall be able to operate in environments worldwide.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>Equipment and Personnel</td>
<td>Find. The user shall be able to acquire situational awareness of the Under Water Effect and Above Water Effect.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>Equipment and Information</td>
<td>Interoperability. The user shall be able to exchange tactical information between authorities and units.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>Equipment and Personnel</td>
<td>Lift. The user shall be able to move personnel and material over land and sea.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>Training and Logistics</td>
<td>Logistical. The user shall be able to easily logistically support the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>Equipment and Personnel</td>
<td>Operational Availability. The user shall be able to have Available Force Elements at a time and place as required to complete the mission.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>09</td>
<td>Equipment and Infrastructure</td>
<td>Operational Locations. The solution shall be able to operate to and from host platforms when required.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10</td>
<td>Equipment and Training</td>
<td>Survivability. The user shall have force elements capable of surviving in hostile and warfighting environments.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Current forecast (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Last year’s forecast (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
<td>10 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Key Performance Measures Variation

2.  Operational Impact of variation
