---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme
Page_from: 203.0
Page_to: 215.0
Project_label: Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_203_215.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Warrior Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Major General Nick Pope
</Td>
<td>31 October 2013 31 October 2016</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects / Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Common Cannon
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Requirement for the Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme is to Sustain the Capability of the Armoured Infantry Within the Balanced Force Against Current and Emerging Threats, Across the Spectrum of Conflict until the Warrior Out of Service Date. the Warrior Armoured Fighting Vehicle Was Brought into Service in 1988 with an Out of Service Date of 2025.

The Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme Consists of Four Main Elements:

1\. Warrior Fightability Lethality Improvement Programme

(a New Turret Incorporating a Fully Stabilised Automatic 40mm Cannon)

The 40 Mm Cased Telescopic Cannon and Ammunition System Has Been Mandated as the Weapon System for Warrior and Procured by a Joint Anglo-French Project. the Project is Currently Part Way Through Qualification of the Ammunition and Cannon, Concurrently the Weapon System is Being Integrated into Warrior by Lockheed Martin UK.

1.  Enhanced Electronic Architecture

(Power Generation and Distribution Enhancement and the Introduction of a Modern Electronic Architecture)

1.  Modular Protection System

(Applique Armour Fixing Points, Enabling a 'tailored' Armour Solution to Counter Specific Threats)

1.  Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle

(a New Variant, Replacing Obsolescent Platforms, that Has Equal Protection and Mobility to the Core Fighting Platforms). Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle is Currently in the Concept Phase and is Subject to Future Approval.

The Current Affordable Fleet is 565 Vehicles Including 445 Currently Planned to be Upgraded to Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme which Includes the Intent to Upgrade 65 to Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle. the Programme will also Extend the Out of Service Date (OSD) to 2040.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Assessment Phase Was Conducted from the Approval of Initial Gate (27 July 2009) to the Contract Effective Date of 31 October 2011. a Competition Was Run, with Two Bidders (BAE Systems and Lockheed Martin) Invited to Compete.

After Initial Gate, the Programme Was Given a Compressed Timeline of Six Months to Gain Main Gate

Approval, and a Business Case Was Submitted to the Investment Approval Board in February 2010. Affordability Issues Due to an over Extended Defence Budget Meant Main Gate Approval Was not Given, with the Bidders Requested to Revise and Confirm their Bids Against a Range of Options. in March 2010 the Investment Approvals Board Approved an Uplift of Up to
£12.4m to Fund the Extended Assessment Phase.

The Programme Team Resubmitted a Main Gate Business Case to the Defence Equipment and Support

Investment Board on 11 July 2011, which Was Approved and Submitted for the Investment and Approval Committee Meeting on 19 July 2011. Approval Was Given by Her Majesty's Treasury on 4 October 2011 and then the Investment and Approvals Committee on 10 October 2011.

The Prime Minister Visited the Lockheed Martin Facility in Ampthill, Bedfordshire on 25 October 2011 and Made a Public Announcement Regarding the Placement of the Contract with Lockheed Martin. the Contract for the Demonstration Phase Was Signed on 31 October 2011.

Within the Warrior Approval, the 40mm Cannon Was the Mandated Weapon System (March 2008) which Would Enable Commonality with the Specialist Vehicles Programme, Thus Benefiting from Common Ammunition and Training. a Review Note for the 40mm Cannon Went to the Investment Approvals Board in March 2010 and Was Approved in April 2010.

Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle is Currently in the Concept Phase, with an Equipment Programme Funding Line of £107m Included in Annual Budgeting Cycle14 to Support Procurement of 65 Vehicles Covering Two Different Variants, an Armoured Personnel Carrier Variant and an Ambulance Variant.

## A.3. Project History

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme Was Approved Against the not to Exceed (NTE) in Service Date (ISD) of March 2020 at 85%
Confidence. This is the Latest Acceptable ISD and is Used as the DE&amp;S Reporting Baseline. March 2008 - 40mm Cased Telescopic Cannon and Ammunition Mandated. July 2009 - Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme Initial Gate Business Case Approved. February 2010 - Investment Approval Board Meeting for Warrior Main Gate Business Case (not Approved Due to Affordability Issues). March 2010 - Ministerial Letter to both Bidders to Confirm the Revise and Confirm of Bids Exercise. April 2010 - Review Note for Cannon to Investment Approvals Board Meeting for Financial Approval. August 2010 - Revise and Confirm Bids Received from Bidders. October 2011 - Formal Approval from Her Majesty's Treasury. October 2011 - Formal Approval from Investment Approvals Committee. October 2011 - Ministerial Announcement by Prime Minister. October 2011 - Contract Effective Date with Lockheed Martin UK. April 2012 - Integrated Baseline Review. May 2012 - System Design Review (Anchor). September 2012 - Ballistic Solution Algorithm Software Drop 3. November 2012 - System Architecture Design Review 510/511 (Anchor). January 2013 - SciSys Electronic Architecture Software Build 2. March 2013 – Unit Zero Turret Integration &amp; Test. November 2013 – Unit Zero Integration Readiness Review. December 2013 – Unit Zero Block 1 – Integration of Test Point A2, Stage 2. December 2013 – FV510 &amp; FV511 Preliminary Design Review (Anchor). March 2014 – Re-Baseline Contract Signed. March 2014 – Live Fire 3 Stage 1 – Unmanned Fire Torque Measurement. Following Slower than Expected Progress by the Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme Prime Contractor a Re-Baselining of the Demonstration Phase Schedule Was Required and the Contract Was Reset in March 2014. the Programme Remained Within Its Financial Approvals and Protected Our Approved in Service Date of March 2020 at 85% by Amending the Sequencing of Manufacturing Phase Activities. MAIN WEAPON SELECTION – Case Telescoped 40mm Cannon:
Approval for the Selection of the 40mm Case Telescoped Weapon System Was Given in 2008 to Enable Commonality with the Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme and the SCOUT Specialist Vehicle Programme, Thus Taking the Benefit of Common Ammunition and Training. Qualification for the 40mm Case Telescoped Weapon System is Led by the Scout - Specialist Vehicles Team. Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle is Currently in the Concept Phase to Support Procurement of 65 Vehicles Covering Two Different Variants, an Armoured Personnel Carrier Variant and an Ambulance Variant.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.4. in-Year Progress

The Following Milestones Have Been Achieved by Lockheed Martin in-Year:

-   April 2014 – FV 510 /511 Delta Design Review in Accordance with LMUK Process.

-   May 2014 – Unit 0 Block 2 Commencement of Hull Integration Activities at LMUK, Ampthill.

-   July 2014 – Unit 0 Unmanned Firing (Anchor).

-   October 2014 – LF3 Stage 2 Static Fire.

-   February 2015 – Unit 0 Turret Integration and Test Completion.

-   February 2015 – Unit 0 Manned Firing (Anchor).

Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle:

Initial Gate Was Planned for Quarter 3 2014, However, Army Headquarters Reviewed the Scope of the Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle Programme with a View to Harmonising the Requirement Across the Broader Army Programme. Both the Quantity of Vehicles and the Number of Variants Required for Armoured

Battlefield Support Vehicle are Expected to Increase as a Consequence of this Review and Defence

Equipment & Support are Awaiting an Implementation Order to Increase the Numbers and Variants of Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle as Well as Deferring the Project by Two Years. Once Implemented Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicle will Become Its Own CAT a Project.

MAIN WEAPON SELECTION – 40mm Cased Telescope Cannon:

The Qualification of the Case Telescoped 40mm Cannon, Armour Piecing Fin Stabilised Discarding Sabot-

Tracer and Target Practice-Tracer Ammunition Was Completed in May 2014 when the Safety and

Environmental Case Report Was Approved by the Ordinance Safety Review Panel. Some Minor Limitations Were Applied in the Initial Use Period for the Cannon, but a Series of ‘gap Closure’ Activities Has Now Addressed Almost all These Limitations, which Await Only the Final Paperwork for Completion. the Remaining Limitations Relate to Barrel Wear and are Expected to be Resolved in Early 2016. on this Basis a £200m Contract for 515 Case Telescoped 40mm Cannons Was Signed with CTAI on 27 Mar 2015 (245 for Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme and Scout Specialist Vehicle and 25 for Training and Further Qualification Activities). Work on Qualifying the General Purpose Round – Point Detonating – Tracer and General Purpose Round – Air Burst - Tracer Has Continued During 2014. We Expect Final Qualification of the Former in 2016 and the Latter by 2019. Initial Work Has Commenced on the High Explosive Training Reduced Range
– Trace and Kinetic Energy Reduced Range – Trace Rounds, which will Offer a Cheaper Training Round that can be Fired Within a Smaller Safety Template, in Order to Optimise Use of the Training Estate. These Latter Ammunition Natures Should be Qualified by 2022.

SUPPORT – Diesel Engines and Transmissions:

The Previously Reported Contract with Caterpillar Defence Products for the Repair of Diesel Engines and Transmissions Expired in March 2014. a New Contract Was Placed with Caterpillar in September 2014 to Continue the Support Arrangement for These Items, Following Approval of the Business Case from the Approving Authorities.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme will Upgrade the Current Warrior Fleet, some of which Have Been Upgraded Through a Series of Modifications and Urgent Operational Requirements. the Current Fleet is Now Restricted in Its Capability on Operations. the Out of Service Date for the Non Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme Warrior Fleet is 2025, so Warrior Must be Upgraded to Avoid a Long-Term Capability Gap Opening Up.

## A.6. Associated Projects – N/a

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin UK
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>common Cannon</Td>
<td>cta International</Td>
<td>design and Development</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">repair of Equipment and Supply of Spares for the Current Warrior Fleet is Provided Through Contracts with Industry Placed by Civil Servants Employed by Defence Equipment and Support and Defence Support Group. a Number of Significant Support Contracts Exist, with Major Examples Being with Thales Optronics Ltd for the Battle Group Thermal Imager Sights and a Contract for the Diesel Engines and Transmission with Caterpillar Ltd. the Support Strategy for the Upgraded Warrior will be Similar to the Current Fleet but will be Reviewed Before Committing to Manufacture. There will be an Initial Purchase of Capital Spares Through the Manufacture Contract to Support the Upgraded Warrior.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin UK
</Td>
<td>manufacture to in Service</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>24</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>common Cannon</Td>
<td>59</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>-15</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>83</Td>
<td>73</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name               | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme | 1234                     | 1319                  | 1424                      |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>1319</Td>
<td>1312</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>1319</Td>
<td>1312</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme (in-Year)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Nov-14

-6

Inflation

Retail Pric

e Index and Other Inflation

Indices Forecast Update Based on

Defence Economics (

\-

£6m

)

Nov-14

+3

Technical

Factors

Implementation of Design Refinements

And Digital Architecture (+£42m),

Revised Training Costs Following New

Procurement Strategy (-£20m),

Updated Cannon Pricing (-£25m),

Other Minor Variances (+£

6

M\)

Net Variation (£m)

-

2

### B.3.1.2 Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>
Annual Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">variation by Category (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">mpr 14</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">-56</Td>
<td>-41</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-15</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="3">mpr 13</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">+42</Td>
<td>+56</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-9</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-14</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
Inflation
</Td>
<td>
An Increase in Retail Price Index (RPIX) Forecast from Defence Economics Could Drive Significant Cost Growth in the Manufacturing Years. Manufacture with the Prime is Subject to a Fixed Price Contract with a Variation of Price Clause Based on RPIX. the Main Gate Approval for Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme Capped the Cost of the Project at £1319m. a Decision is not Required until the End of the Demonstration Phase when We Commit to Manufacture, which will be Supported by an Information/Review Note to Address RPIX Growth if it Occurs.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>battle Group Thermal Imaging</Td>
<td>61</Td>
<td>67</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>diesel Engines and Transmissions</Td>
<td>25</Td>
<td>15</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>diesel Engines and Transmissions (New Contract)</Td>
<td>37</Td>
<td>38</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Battle Group Thermal Imaging (in-Year) – N/a

### B.4.1.1.1 Battle Group Thermal Imaging (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
MPR 13
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
-
</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirement</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
HM Treasury Reserve
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Pre-MPR<sup>1</Sup>
</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirement</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.4.1.2 Diesel Engines and Transmissions (in-Year) – N/a

### B.4.1.2.1 Diesel Engines and Transmissions (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 13
</Td>
<td>
+2
</Td>
<td>
+2
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 12
</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Pre-MPR<sup>2</Sup>
</Td>
<td>
-4
</Td>
<td>
-4
</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirement</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-10
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  This Variation Pre-Dates the Programmes Inclusion Within the MPR.

2.  This Variation Pre-Dates the Programmes Inclusion Within the MPR.

### B.4.1.3 Diesel Engines and Transmissions (New)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

+1

Technical

Factors

Repairs Completed in

\-

Year Cost more

Than Forecast in Business Case

Net Variation (£

m)

+1

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>65</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>65</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>134</Td>
<td>95</Td>
<td>229</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>67</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>256</Td>
<td>105</Td>
<td>361</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main

Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment

Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>july 2009</Td>
<td>
October 2011
</Td>
<td>27</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>common Cannon</Td>
<td>july 2009</Td>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td>9</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted For</Th>
<th>latest Approved</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>march 2018</Td>
<td>
November 2018
</Td>
<td>october 2020</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
In Service Date an Armoured Infantry Company (Infantry Section and Command Variants) Trained to Collective Training Level 2. Consisting of the Delivery of 28 Vehicles along with Training and Logistic Solutions. This Date will also be Designated as Initial Operating Capability 1a. Initial Operating Capability 1b (in Service Date + 9 Months) is Defined as the Combat Support and Combat Service Support Variants Supporting in Service Date
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2a Progress Against Budgeted for Date at Approval

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Date</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme (50%)</Td>
<td>
November 2018
</Td>
<td>july 2019</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2b Progress Against Approval Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approval Date
</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme (85%
NTE Approval )</Td>
<td>march 2020</Td>
<td>
March 2020
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">the Business Case Approval for the Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme in Service Date Was Granted on the Basis of the
‘not to Exceed’ Date of March 2020 (Set at an 85 per Cent Level of Confidence), Rather than the Usual Practice of Approval on the Basis of 50 per Cent Confidence. We Have Measured Progress Here Against the in Service Date at the 50 per Cent Confidence Level in Order to Report Changes to the Delivery Forecast and to be Consistent with the Other Projects in this Report. the Project Team Continues to Forecast that the Programme will Meet Its ‘not to Exceed’ in Service Date.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme (in-Year) – N/a

### C.3.3.2 Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 31%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>
Annual Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>+8 Against 50% Date 0 Against Approved 85% Date</Td>
<td>
+8 Against 50% Date 0 Against Approved 85% Date
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+8 Against 50% 0 Against 85%
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – N/a

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>warrior Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>445 Warriors Upgraded (Including 65

Armoured Battlefield Support Vehicles)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract

## C.5.1. Scope of Support / Training / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 76%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>battle Group Thermal Imaging</Td>
<td>
Battle Group Thermal Imager is a Thermal Imaging Sighting System Incorporating a Laser Range-Finder and Tactical Navigation System and is Used on Warrior. the Battle Group Thermal Imager Contract is with Thales Optronics Ltd, Selected Through Competition and Covers the Procurement of Installed Systems and Provision of a Support Service for a Period of 15 Years from 4 March 2004 until March 2019. Battle Group Thermal Imager is a Contractor Logistic Support Project with a 1st to 4th Line Maintenance and Repair Policy and Includes Warehousing, Supply, Repair, Reporting and Post Design Services Activities. Spares Include both Repairables and Consumables Delivered Direct from the Supplier's Warehouse to the User in Germany / Canada and into Purple Gate for Users in the UK / Operations. Lockheed Martin UK will Upgrade the Battle Group Thermal Imager Sights on Warrior as Part of their Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme Solution.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>diesel Engines and Transmissions</Td>
<td>
CV8 Diesel Main Engines and X300 Transmissions are Repaired Through a Single Source Contract Placed with the Original Equipment Manufacturer, Caterpillar, Shrewsbury Ltd. This Contract is an Enabling Arrangement that Enables Each Year's Repair Load to be Varied to Meet the User's Planned Activity Demand. Engines and Transmissions are Repaired using Original Equipment Manufacturer Parts Through a Menu Pricing Process.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>battle Group Thermal Imaging</Td>
<td>march 2004</Td>
<td>march 2004</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>diesel Engines and Transmissions</Td>
<td>april 2009</Td>
<td>april 2009</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>diesel Engines and Transmissions (New)</Td>
<td>
September 2014
</Td>
<td>
September 2014
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.3. Progress Against Approved End of Support / Training / PFI Contract Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>battle Group Thermal Imaging</Td>
<td>
March 2019
</Td>
<td>
March 2019
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>diesel Engines and Transmissions</Td>
<td>
March 2014
</Td>
<td>
March 2014
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>diesel Engines and Transmissions (New)</Td>
<td>
March 2019
</Td>
<td>
March 2019
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.4. Other Costs Resulting from Support Cost Variation – N/a

## C.5.5. Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Support Contract Variation – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

| Current Score | Comments |
|-------------------|--------------|
| 78 Amber          |              |

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Equipment Solution Validated Against Current Capability Audit Outputs.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Training Solution Validated Against Current Capability Audit Outputs.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
Logistics Solution Validated Against Current Capability Audit Outputs.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Infrastructure Solution Validated Against Current (&lt;2 Years) Capability Audit Outputs.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Personnel Solution Validated Against Current (&lt;2 Years) Capability Audit Outputs.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Impact of Current (&lt;2 Years) Capability Audit Upon Doctrine &amp;
Concepts Assessed.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Organisation Solution Validated Against Current (&lt;2 Years) Capability Audit Outputs.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Information Solution Validated Against Current (&lt;2 Years) Capability Audit Outputs.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1. Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Suppress an Enemy Section in the Open, when Own Vehicle is Moving as Well as Static, by Day and by Night.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 2</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Destroy (WCSP Decode 63) IFVs when Own Vehicle is Moving as Well as Static, by Day and by Night.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Carry Personnel and Equipment Appropriate to the Role.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Requires that both Commander and Gunner Shall be Able to Maintain all Round Local Situational Awareness (SA) in all Environments, Including Urban, when Closed Down and Head Out, by Day or Night when Own Vehicle is Moving as Well as Static.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with Appropriate Levels of Operational and Tactical Mobility Commensurate to Role.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with the Ability to Quickly Add and Remove Protection Appropriate to the Operational Threat.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 7</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Store, Operate and Transport the Capability in all Relevant Climates and Terrains.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 8</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level for Training and Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 9</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interface and is Interoperable with Current and Known Future Systems.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a

Assessment Phase Projects

213
