---
year: 2008.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: MILITARY AFLOAT REACH AND SUSTAINABILITY
page_from: 213.0
page_to: 216.0
project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2008_213_216.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

MILITARY AFLOAT

REACH AND

SUSTAINABILITY

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH AND SUSTAINABILITY

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability system will provide afloat logistic support to UK and allied maritime task groups at sea and their amphibious components operating ashore. Although not strictly a one-for-one replacement programme, new vessels will incrementally replace much of the existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary flotilla, as ships enter and leave service respectively.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability capability is designed to support three distinct types of maritime task group: Carrier Strike, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Security. The demands of each differ significantly, but are all composed of three common elements:

Bulk Consumables - fuel and potable water which are transferred by hose.

Non-bulk consumables - Food, ammunition and general stores. Solid cargo which is transferred in unit loads, either ship-ship or ship-shore.

Forward Aviation Support - The provision of helicopter basing and operating facilities to accommodate some of the task group’s aircraft or to provide operational flexibility during a campaign.

An early decision was taken to base the system solution on three classes of ship:

Fleet Tanker - Bulk consumables and Forward Aviation Support for all task groups. Limited non-bulk consumables capacity to support the small Maritime Security groups.

Fleet Solid Support Ship - Non-bulk consumables and Forward Aviation Support, optimised for the Carrier Strike group.

Joint Sea-Based Logistics Ship - Non-bulk consumables and Forward Aviation Support, optimised for the Littoral Manoeuvre group.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability system will be in service until around 2047 and as such the solution will be designed to accommodate the requirements of current and known future force structures, including, Type 45, The Queen Elizabeth and The Prince of Wales Future Aircraft Carriers, Joint Strike Fighter and Future Surface Combatant .

The capability to be provided is essential to the evolving logistic support needs of the Royal

Navy. The proposed procurement profile of Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability ships has been matched to this need, the initial focus being on the double-hulled Fleet Tankers which are urgently required in order to comply with International Maritime environmental standards.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e. Main Gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability project received formal approval to enter its Assessment Phase in July 2005. Between March and September 2007, the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability procurement strategy was reviewed, with Ministerial agreement, to reflect the urgent need to procure the Fleet Tanker element of the programme. The previous Alliance strategy was terminated in May 2007 resulting in the termination of the competition to choose an Integrator. Fleet Solid Support and Joint Sea Based Logistics ships will now form part of a separate strategy to be considered with wider UK industrial interests. The new strategy, which received Ministerial approval in December 2007, is a ‘Competitive and Adaptive’ approach in which open competition will be used to generate costed and de-risked proposals for a Fleet Tanker Main Gate Business Case approval in early 2009. Affordability of the programme is being addressed through normal Assessment Phase work to create an affordable Main Gate business case based on taut realistic cost estimates and taking account of options resulting from Planning Round 2008. The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase will cover generic assessment and design activity for the whole programme and the initial design for the Fleet Tankers. As well as approving the new procurement strategy, in December 2007, the Minister approved the designation and delegation of the Heavy Replenishment at Sea project as a separate Category D project. All data following is based on the revised procurement strategy. The approved budget for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase is £44m and the current forecast for the Assessment Phase, including early design and requirement work for Fleet Solid Support and Joint Sea Based Logistics vessels  <u>(Fleet Tanker</u> <u>, Fleet</u> Solid Support, <u>and Joint Sea Based Logistics,</u> <u>). This is reduced from  due to the review</u> of the procurement strategy which took place in 2007.</th>
</tr>
<tr>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Due to the planned phased nature of the project, support and oversight for Fleet Tankers and further design work on subsequent classes will take place after the Fleet Tanker main investment decision, and the current total forecast is <u>, for Fleet Tankers,  for Fleet Solid Support</u> and  for Joint Sea Based Logistics vessels) bringing the total expected cost of Assessment work and later design for future classes to .</td>
</tr>
<tr>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
44
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Earliest | Latest |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Envelope within which 1^st^ of Class Fleet Tanker capability will be available                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | \\\       | \\\     |
| The capability is essential for the effective deployment of the Royal Navy and replaces existing ships that will be otherwise operating outwith Maritime Pollution regulations at ages well beyond their design life. The capability envelope given above is for the Fleet Tanker element of the programme only. The target Planned Assumption of Sevice Entry date for the first of Class Fleet Tanker is \\\. Earliest and latest dates for the introduction of the Fleet Solid Support and Joint Sea Based Logistics capability will be determined later in the programme. |              |            |

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
