---
year: 2007.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: C VEHICLE CAPABILITY - PFI
page_from: 51.0
page_to: 60.0
project_label: C Vehicle PFI
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2007_51_60.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

VEHICLE CAPABILITY – PFI

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

ENGINEERING SYSTEMS SUPPORT

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability: Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The C Vehicle fleet comprises of over 4,000 items of 100 major types such as rough terrain earthmoving equipment, specialist engineer construction plant as well as field material handling equipment. These are held at varying degrees of military readiness and are capable of undertaking a wide range of combat support, logistic and construction tasks. The majority of the fleet is Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) which has been modified to meet the military requirement.

The contract was signed on 10 June 2005 with ALC (SPC) Limited.

The Operational Feasibility Test was successfully completed and In-Service Date (ISD) was declared on 31 March 2006. The remainder of the Implementation Rollout Phases were all completed on time leading to Full Service Commencement (FSC) in May 2006.

There are now approximately 1,500 pieces of equipment and machinery on demand in the hands of the user in the average month in support of operations and peacetime training. The Equipment Refurbishment and Replacement Programme is operating to the Schedule in the contract.

Experience on operations has identified that spares performance continues to affect Asset Availability (Key User Requirement 07). Performance has improved significantly throughout this year and further corrective action is planned.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>ALC (SPC) Limited</td>
<td>Competitive - International</td>
<td>Firm price for 5 years then fixed price subject to Variation of Price</td>
<td>PFI</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
703
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
714
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-11
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+16</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>The requirement to provide support was reduced in line with the June 2005 contract award date which delayed the transfer of operational equipment until 2006/07. Management of the requirement with ALC and stakeholders led to a cost reduction (-£2m) against that which had been originally identified.

The cost was reduced following the final negotiations leading to the agreed contract price (-£6m). The set-up costs and ongoing project costs for the project were also reviewed in line with the contract obligations for the estate, Management Information System and consultant support (+£2m) and the payment to other agencies for estate costs (-£1m). Realism to reflect delay in contract award (+£5m), re-scoping of project specific items (+£4m) and review of fixed price risk (+£2m). Adjustment in line with improved identification of MoD requirements during January-March 2005 in
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>Variation (£m)</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>support of the PFI Service Provider including set-up costs for the Management Information System (+£2m), estates provision (+£1m) and initial service support (+£9m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+13</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>External assistance (+£2m). Transfer of resource expenditure following change in policy for PFI programmes (+£56m). Change to treatment for transfer of existing fleet from MoD to Service Provider (-£40m). Bid process redefinition (-£5m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-40</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-11</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</th>
<th>
57
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
PFI Service with annual service payments
</td>
<td>
2019/2020-2020/2021
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
Completion of the Operational Feasibility Test (OFT) and has been certified by Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre) as Accepted.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
March 2006
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
April 2006
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-1
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>The live operational test has been successfully completed by ALC and the process of validating the result (and lessons learnt) has been completed within March 2006 (-1 month). Whilst the peacetime service is being rolled out successfully, there is still a requirement for ALC to pass a live operational test. Current operational commitments and the resource intensive roll out will result in the test taking place in late March 2006. The audit and approval process will therefore take place in early April 2006 (+1 month).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Extended negotiations surrounding the final project issues (+1 month). Effect of Standardisation of PFI Contracts version 3 review and extended re-negotiations (+2 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+2</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Delay caused by HM Treasury constraint on transfer of resource expenditure for the PFI service. Directors of the Equipment Capability agreed to proceed until completion of the internal funding process in September 2004.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
3
</td>
<td>e. Operational impact of ISD variation</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
ISD achieved on time with no variations
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
Deployment and Recovery: The User requires strategic, operational and tactical deployability of the capability using current in-service and planned transport systems.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
Mobility: The User requires the ability to utilise C Vehicles to undertake: Obstacle breaching: Route clearance: Support to bridging operation: Road construction and maintenance: Snow &amp; ice clearance:
Beach opening and Bomb disposal
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
Survivability: The User requires the ability to utilise C Vehicles to: Dig in armour, infantry, artillery and Headquarters: Harden buildings: Construct deception and concealment earthworks
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
Sustainability Operations: The User requires the capability to utilise C Vehicles to: Handle stores: Outload to stockpiles: Operate quarries: Construct Bulk Fuel Instillations: Clear derelict buildings:
Construct water points
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
Air Support: The User requires the capability to utilise C Vehicles to provide and repair aircraft operating surfaces and essential air support facilities.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
Readiness: The User requires the C Vehicle capability to be available to meet the readiness criteria of units and formations.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
Availability: The system shall achieve an Asset Delivery Availability of 100%, with an asset Intrinsic (constituting training, spares &amp; maintenance) Availability of at least 90%.
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
Maintenance Regime: The Service Provider must have a scheduled and unscheduled maintenance regime in place and have the ability to support the capability as far forward as is operationally practical.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>
Spares: The arrangements for the provision and delivery of spares must be compatible with inservice systems.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</td>
<td>
Training: The Service Provider must ensure that military manpower is appropriately trained to operate and maintain the supplied equipment on operations and in peacetime.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
100 %
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>
KUR07 Availability
</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Spares performance at Full Service Commencement was insufficient to satisfy the Asset Availability KUR07 for equipment on operations. Corrective action has been taken and significant improvement has been made but further work is still required. Notwithstanding that the contractual KPI(6) relating to this element is being achieved.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Initial Gate approval was granted in November 2000 based on Pre-Qualification Questionnaire documentation from six consortia. Three short-listed contenders were chosen to receive the Invitation to Negotiate (ITN), released in March 2001. Throughout this period a process called ‘convergence’ was used to acquaint industry with the requirement and also to gain feedback on alternative solutions. The ITN responses were assessed against specified criteria. At this time, the three contenders reduced to two, as two bidders combined teams to propose a consolidated bid. A further round of Revise and Confirm offers were requested in May 2002, with responses from the two consortia (Amey Lex Consortia; FastEx) in June 2002.

The evaluation of the two bids (ALC and FastEx) against the Public Sector Comparator was completed in early 2003 before final submission of the Main Gate Business Case to the Investment Approvals Board (IAB) in March 2003. Whilst awaiting the IAB and Ministerial decision, no interaction could take place with the bidders, however, specific elements of the requirement were reviewed to address any inconsistencies and implement additional risk reduction measures. This process led to the revised Preferred Bidder documentation published in December 2003. At the time of announcing the Main Gate decision to proceed with ALC, it was also recognised that a funding gap had been created by the constraint placed on the use of Indirect Resource Departmental Expenditure Limit (IR DEL) (non-cash) by HM Treasury. The funding requirements were addressed with ALC as the initial part of the contract negotiations and with the Directors Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre) and (Expeditionary Logistics and Support) in Equipment Plan 2005.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase cost
</th>
<th>Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Actual Cost</td>
<td>
3
</td>
<td>
0.4%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
4
</td>
<td>
0.6%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-1
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
December 2003
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
November 2000
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
37
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>
669
</td>
<td>
674
</td>
<td>
714
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
July 2005
</td>
<td>
October 2005
</td>
<td>
April 2006
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
