---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Successor
Page_from: 385.0
Page_to: 393.0
Project_label: Successor
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_385_393.md
---
FALSE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 64%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Successor
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Submarines
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>
Date Appointed
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Vice Admiral Andrew Matthews
</Td>
<td>11th May 2012</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects /</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Submarines Concept Phase Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Concept Phase Nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Concept Phase Common Missile Compartment Non-Recurring Costs Future Submarines Assessment Phase Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Assessment Phase Nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Assessment Phase Common Missile Compartment Assessment Phase
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

In 2007 Parliament Endorsed the Government's Decision Set Out in their 2006 White Paper, "The Future of the United Kingdom's Nuclear Deterrent" Cm 6994, to Maintain a Continuous at Sea Nuclear Deterrent by Means of a New Class of Submarine. This will Replace the Current Vanguard Class as it Comes Out of Service.

The Submarines are Part of the MOD's Committed Core Equipment Programme as Announced by the Secretary of State on 14th May 2012. Any Decision to Build will not be Taken until after the Next General Election Expected in 2015 with any Main Gate Approval Expected in 2016.

The Successor Boats are Expected to Have a 25 Year Life with the Option of at Least a Five Year Extension and Suitable Low Detectability. the Current Planned Service Entry Date for the First Boat is 2028.

A Common Missile Compartment for the Submarine is Being Developed with the United States. This will House the Trident Strategic Weapon System.

Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant: At Initial Gate in April 2011, the Decision Was Taken to Power the Submarine with a Nuclear Propulsion System Known as Pressurised Water Reactor 3 (PWR3) which Incorporates the Latest Safety Technologies and Ensures the Boats Have the Performance to Deliver the United Kingdom's Minimum Credible Nuclear Deterrent Out to the 2060s.

The Nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Programme Brings Focused Investment to Regenerate the UK Nuclear Propulsion Design and Support Capability, and Ensures We Have the Design Base Essential to Maintain a Strategic Sovereign UK Nuclear Capability.

The Wider Programme: The Strategic Defence and Security Review Concluded that it Would be Possible to Defer Decisions on the Replacement of both the Warhead and Infrastructure Elements of the Programme. Over the Next few Years Concept Studies will Begin to Refine Potential Programmes and Costs. No Decision as to Whether a New Warhead Design is Needed will be Taken until the Next Parliament. Neither the Warhead nor Infrastructure is Covered in this Report.

The Rolls-Royce Core Production Capability Facility at Raynesway Has Recently Passed Main Gate and will Provide the Fuel Cores for Successor. This is Covered by a Separate Project Summary Sheet.

^enter\ Text\ Here^The Expected Overall Cost of any Replacement of the Nuclear Deterrent Remains as Set Out in Para 5-11 of the 2006 White Paper as Between £15-20bn for a Four Boat Solution.

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
The MOD's Future Submarines Project Team Was Established in 2007 from a Small Group Within the then Nuclear Directorate. Three Companies, BAE Submarine Solutions (Platform), Babcock (Support), and Rolls-Royce (Power Plant) Known as the Tier One Industrial Partners Were Awarded Contracts for the Collaborative Concept Phase. This Work Informed the Options Considered at Initial Gate. a Technical Demonstrator Programme Was also Undertaken. an Integrated Project Management Team Has also Been Established. Initial Gate Was Approved on 14th April 2011 and Announced in Parliament on 18 May 2011 when a Report to Parliament, "The United Kingdom's Future Nuclear Deterrent:The Submarine Initial Gate Parliamentary Report" Was Made. This Followed a Concept Phase from 2006/07 to April 2011 During which
£914m Was Approved and Spent. This Period Saw the Preparation and Staffing of the Initial Gate Business Case Through the MOD and Treasury with Treasury Approval Received on 29th March 2011. 2010 also Saw the SDSR Strategic Defence and Security Review,
"Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: Publication of the Strategic Defence and Security Review" Chapter Three, Published on 19th October 2010, and the Trident Value for Money Review ( Fact Sheet Ten). These Made Changes to the White Paper Assumptions. These Included: a Deferral of the Planned Delivery of the First Submarine from 2024 to 2028, and a Deferral of the Main Gate Decision Point from 2014 to 2016. There Was also Agreement with the United States on the Major Parameters of the Jointly-Developed Common Missile Compartment Design that will be Capable of Carrying the Current Trident D5 Missiles and any Replacement Missile Once the D5 Reaches the End of Its Expected Life in the 2040s. Initial Gate Considered the Submarine Design using Pull Through of Astute Technology to Reduce Cost and Design and Delivery Risk, and Provide Commonality in Training and Maintenance. There Were also Opportunities to Take Advantage of Developments Since the Astute Design. One Such Was the Selection of Pressure Water Reactor 3 as the Submarine's Propulsion System.

<sup>enter Text Here</sup>Pressure Water Reactor 3 Provides Superior Performance and Meets the Nuclear Safety Regulator's Requirement to Continually Improve Our Performance and Meet the "As Low as Reasonably Practicable" Requirement. However Pressure Water Reactor 3 is more Expensive to Buy and Operate over a 25 Year Period, but Cheaper if the Boats are Run for Longer.

The Coalition's Policy on the Successor Deterrent is Clear, and it is that it is Committed to the United Kingdom's Nuclear Deterrent Based on a Ballistic Missile Submarine. the Trident Alternatives Study will Form Part of the Information Considered to Assist the Decisions Needed at Main Gate.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.3. in-Year Progress

Immediately Following Approval, Design Activities Commenced under an Extension of the Concept Contract While the Full Design Phase and Engineering Services Framework Contracts Were Finalised and Signed with BAE Submarine Solutions and Babcock on 13th December 2011. These Cover the Period Up to Main Gate and Consist of an Overarching Framework Structure with Rolling Waves of Task Packages. a Contract Amendment to Align with These Contracts Was also Placed with Rolls-Royce. a Collaborative Agreement Between all Three Companies and the MOD Was also Signed. This Governs the Relationships Between Industrial Parties’ Performance and Profit Retention.

An Integrated Master Schedule Has Been Agreed with Industry Across the Programme.

The MOD and Integrated Programme Management Teams Have Been Established and Teams Built Up in Barrow and Derby. Staff Resource Remains a Challenge for the MOD in the Face of Overall MOD Cuts.

A Review Note on Progress in Year Was Submitted to the MOD's Investment Approvals Committee in July 2012. This is Due to be Followed in Autumn 2012 by the First "Successor" Annual Report to Parliament.

The Approval for the Common Missile Compartment is not Part of the Initial Gate Approval, but the Main Investment Decision will be in the Main Gate Approval. It is Planned that a Review Note Regarding the Build Location will be Submitted in 2012.

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project /
Increment Title
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Submarines Concept Phase
</Td>
<td>
Ascertained Costs to the Three Tier 1 Contractors
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Concept Phase
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Concept Phase
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - International
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Common Missile Compartment Non-
Recurring Costs
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - International
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Submarines Assessment Phase
</Td>
<td>
Ascertained Costs to the Three Tier 1 Contractors
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Milestones for the Year 2012/13 are to Hold a Whole Boat Strategic Design Review and an Extension of the Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Contract.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Without the Design and Build of a New Class of Ballistic Missile Submarines, the United Kingdom Would be Unable to Maintain Its Independent Nuclear Deterrent Once the Current Vanguard Class Goes Out of Service. This Decision Was Agreed by Parliament in 2007 Following the 2006 White Paper: "The Future of the United Kingdom's Nuclear Deterrent" Cm 6994. the Current Government also Supports the Maintenance of the United Kingdom’s Independent Nuclear Deterrent Capability.

The Nuclear Deterrent is a Current Operation.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Title of Associated

Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability May 2021</Td>
<td>post Main-Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Assessment Phase</Th>
<th>
Single Source
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - International
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>common Missile Compartment Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
To be Decided
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Support Chain Strategy is in Preparation, and Engagement Has Started. the Aim is for Optimised, Affordable Through Life Support with Established Whole Life Costs and Challenging Availability Targets. the Target is to Have a Whole Life Cost that Does not Exceed that of the Current Vanguard Class and Ensure Maintenance of the Continuous at Sea Deterrent. Drivers for Change Include: Long Term Supply Chain Incentivisation and Reductions in Design Complexity and Component Range and Scale. Babcock is the Tier 1 Company for Support, and the Strategy will be Delivered as a Collaborative Activity Within the Submarine Enterprise Performance Programme.

Enter Text Here</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
Babcock
</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

SUCCESSOR



<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">
+7 " 8 3 9
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>34
"
!</Td>
<td>$</Td>
<td>
5 $
</Td>
<td>
6 $
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Submarines Concept Phase</Td>
<td>209</Td>
<td>198</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Concept</Td>
<td>305</Td>
<td>305</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Concept Phase</Td>
<td>108</Td>
<td>80</Td>
<td>-28</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>common Missile Compartment Non-Recurring Costs</Td>
<td>283</Td>
<td>263</Td>
<td>-20</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>!
"
$</Td>
<td>%&amp;'</Td>
<td>()</Td>
<td>+'%</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Submarines Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1786</Td>
<td>1830</Td>
<td>+44</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1064</Td>
<td>1066</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>166</Td>
<td>141</Td>
<td>-25</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>!
$</Td>
<td>,&amp;</Td>
<td>,&amp;,-</Td>
<td>./</Td>
<td>+</Td>
<td>+</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>!</Td>
<td>,%/</Td>
<td>,((,</Td>
<td>+,(</Td>
<td>+</Td>
<td>+</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

!0 + 1 2

SUCCESSOR

SUCCESSOR

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI- N/a B.5 Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 48%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011 (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure

(£m)
</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>concept Phase</Td>
<td>
535
</Td>
<td>
49
</Td>
<td>
584
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
201
</Td>
<td>
318
</Td>
<td>
519
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>
736
</Td>
<td>
367
</Td>
<td>
1103
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

SUCCESSOR

SUCCESSOR

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>successor</Td>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>
December 2016
</Td>
<td>68</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>successor</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable C.5 Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicab SUCCESSOR

SUCCESSOR

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
1-10
</Td>
<td>successor Technology Readiness Levels are Classified.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable

SUCCESSOR
