---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate Projects
Project: Type 45 Destroyer
Page_from: 186.0
Page_to: 201.0
Project_label: Type 45 Destroyer
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_186_201.md
---
Team Responsible

Destroyers Team

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Head of Above Water Capability

Senior Responsible Officer

\-

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision – N/a • Post Main Investment Decision – Type 45 Six Ship Design & Build • Support Contract –

1.  Type 45 Initial Spares (Industrial Investment and Long Lead Spares).

2.  Type 45 Full Support

• Other – Please Provide Details – N/a

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Type 45 is a New Class of Six Anti-Air Warfare Destroyers, to Replace the Capability Provided by the Royal Navy’s Existing Type 42s. the Warship is Being Procured Nationally. the Type 45 will Carry the Principal Anti-Air Missile System which is Capable of Protecting the Vessels and Ships in their Company Against Aircraft and Missiles, Satisfying the Fleet’s Need for Area Air Defence Capability into the 2030s. the Principal Anti-Air Missile System is Being Procured Collaboratively with France and Italy. the Destroyers Team is Responsible for Providing the Principal Anti-Air Missile System to the Warship Prime Contractor.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Type 45 Destroyer Programme Builds on the Assessment Work Carried Out in Phase 1 of the Collaborative Horizon Project, the Warship Element of the Common New Generation Frigate Programme. Following the Decision of the Three Horizon Partners (France, Italy and the United Kingdom) to Proceed with the Principal Anti-Air Missile System, but to Pursue National Warship Programmes, BAE Systems Was Appointed Prime Contractor for the Type 45 in November 1999. the Contract for the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Full Scale Engineering Development and Initial

Production Was Placed in August 1999. Main Gate Approval for the Warship Was Achieved in July 2000 and a Contract for Demonstration and First of Class Manufacture Was Placed in December 2000.

## A.3. Progress

BAE Systems Electronics Was Appointed Prime Contractor for the Type 45 in November 1999 and a Contract for Demonstration and First of Class Manufacture for the First Three Ships Was Placed in December 2000. a Contract for a Further Three Type 45 Hulls Was Placed with the Prime Contractor in

February 2002. the Ships are Being Built under Sub-Contract by BAE Systems Surface Fleet Ltd. the

Demonstration & Manufacture Contract Was Amended to Reflect the Investment Approvals Board SixShip Approval Gained in August 2007. This Change Has Introduced a Staged Acceptance Process for Each Ship which Commences with Acceptance Off Contract, Thereby Giving Control of the Vessel to the MOD to Undertake a Further Period of Trials and Acceptance Activity Leading to the Declaration of InService Date. It Was Announced in June 2008 that as Part of the Department’s 2008 Planning Round the Decision Was Taken not to Take Up the Option to Proceed with Type 45 Ships 7 and 8.

The Past Year Has Seen Significant Progress in the Manufacture of the Six Ships. All Ships are Now in Production. the First Ship, HMS Daring Was Commissioned into the Royal Navy in July 2009. a Contract for Up to Seven Years of Support for Type 45 Was Awarded to BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd in September 2009. the Fifth Type 45, Defender, Was Launched in October 2009. the Second Ship (Dauntless) Was Accepted Off Contract from the Prime Contractor in December 2009. Test Firings of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Took Place in May and November 2009. These Test Firings Did not Meet all of their Planned Trials Objectives.

During the Department’s 2010 Planning Round a Decision Was Taken to Amend the Production Programme of Aster Missiles. This Decision Deferred Production of some Missiles, Reducing Costs in Early Years, but Adding
£46m to the Overall Cost of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme. However, the Effect of Other Planning Round Decisions and the Benefits Accrued Through the Good Progress of the Ship Programme, Mean that the Result is No Overall Cost Growth of the T45 Programme.

## A.4. Capability Risks

In Order for a Force of Ships to Operate Safely at Sea and Project Power Onto the Land, it Has to Reduce Its Susceptibility to Attack from the Air. the Current Generation of Anti-Air Warfare Capability (Type 42 Destroyer) Has Already Been Extended Beyond Its Design Life and is Now Rapidly Approaching Its Out of Service Date. the Type 45 Destroyer will Ensure that UK Maritime Forces Retain a Sufficiently Robust Capability to Counter the Growing Threat from the Air for the Next 25 Years. Without the Type 45, the UK Would be Severely Limited in Its Ability to Operate Maritime Forces in all but the Most Benign Environments. There Would also be a Significant Shortfall in the Number of Ships Available to Deploy World-Wide in Support of Wider British Interests, Fulfilling Roles from Defence Diplomacy to Disaster Relief to Crisis Intervention.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 45 Warship
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd (BAE Systems Electronics Ltd Farnborough)
</Td>
<td>
Full Development and Production
</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee Shareline</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Principal Anti-Air Missile System
</Td>
<td>
EURO PAAMS
</Td>
<td>
Full Scale Engineering Development and Initial Production Including Missiles for Initial Use.
</Td>
<td>fixed Price</Td>
<td>collaborative with France and Italy</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Principal Anti-Air Missile System
</Td>
<td>
EURO PAAMS
</Td>
<td>
Follow-on Ships Production
</Td>
<td>fixed Price for Five Follow-on Equipments</Td>
<td>collaborative with France and Italy</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Principal Anti-Air Missile System
</Td>
<td>
EUROSAM &amp; UKAMS<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A>
</Td>
<td>
Production of Missiles
</Td>
<td>fixed Price</Td>
<td>collaborative with France and Italy Through Organisation Conjointe De Coopération en Matière d'Armement</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">ukams is a Wholly Owned Company of MBDA<a Href="Fnref1"
Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

## A.7. Support Strategy

There are 3 Broad Layers to Type 45 Destroyer Support:

1.  Interim Support (Support to Stage 2 Trials) Covers the Period from the First of Class (HMS Daring) Acceptance Off Contract to in-Service Date. the Change to Ship Acceptance Approved as Part of Wider Programme Re-Approval in August 2007 Advances the Date that the First of Class is Accepted Off Contract, Consequently Requiring Interim Support Arrangements to be Put in Place until in-Service Date. Funding for Interim Support Was Approved under the Six Ship Approval and Costs are Reported Against the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase Costs for Type 45, Hence this Element is not Reported Further Within the Support Section. the Interim Support Contract will Complete at in-Service Date for HMS Daring. for the Other Five Type 45s Support to Stage 2 Trials will be Provided under the Full Support Contract, Although, as Above, Funding Was Approved under the Six Ship Approval and Costs are Reported Against the Demonstration & Manufacture Phase Costs for Type 45.

2.  Type 45 Initial Spares (Industrial Investment and Long Lead Spares). Purchase of Long-Lead Spares and Industrial Mobilisation Activities for which Contracts Need to be Placed Ahead of the Type 45 Full Support Solution (See C. Below) in Order to be Available for in-Service Date. the Approval Did not Set any Time Limits for Contract End Dates, Therefore Only Progress Against Cost Boundaries is Reported Within the Support Section.

3.  Full Support. Phase 1 of the Long Term Support Strategy is the Delivery of a Class Wide Type 45 Support Solution Through a Single Source Incentivised Contract with BAE Systems Surface Fleet Ltd as the Support Integrator for Type 45. Support will then Migrate into the Surface Ship Support Programme (SSSP). the Full Support Contract for the Warship (the Phase 1 Work Described above)

Was Placed in September 2009. It Includes the Activities to Establish the Support Solution Infrastructure and Team and then to Provide Up to 7 Years in-Service Support. Support to the Principal Anti-Air Missile System (PAAMS) will be Provided by a Separate Single Source Incentivised Contract with MBDA (UK). Negotiations for this Contract are Ongoing.

### A.7.1. Support / Service / PFI Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 45 Initial Spares
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd
</Td>
<td>
Purchase of Long Lead Time Spares and Industrial Mobilisation Activities
</Td>
<td>
Mix of Fixed and Firm Price
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 45 Full Support
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd
</Td>
<td>
Up to Seven Years’ of Support for Type 45 Platform Equipments and some Complex Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Target Cost Incetivised Fee (TCIF)
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Type 45 Destroyer
</Td>
<td>
213
</Td>
<td>
232
</Td>
<td>
+19
</Td>
<td>3.2%</Td>
<td>
3.5
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Total
</Td>
<td>
213
</Td>
<td>
232
</Td>
<td>
+19
</Td>
<td>3.2%</Td>
<td>
3.5
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
5000
</Td>
<td>
5475
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year

Variation

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
5475
</Td>
<td>
6464
</Td>
<td>
+989
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>
5475
</Td>
<td>
6464
</Td>
<td>
+989
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Type 45 Destroyer

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
-17
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>
Benefit of on Time Contractual Delivery of Ships 1 &amp; 2
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>
In-Year Underspend (-£9m), Resulting in Slippage of Work (+£6m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
+2
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Planning Round Decisions and Adjustments in 2009 (+£2m)
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
-40
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Planning Round Decisions and Adjustments in 2010 (-£40m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
-8
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
<td>
Benefit of Reduced Cost of Capital Charges for Early Ship Delivery (£8m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
+20
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>
Principal Anti-Air Missile System FOREX Increase, in-Year (+£14m) and in Planning Round 2010 (+£7m), but Reduced FOREX Related iRDEL (-£1m)
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
+46
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme Re-Alignment of Aster Missile Production Schedule in Planning Round 2010
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-46
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Benefits of Earlier Delivery of Platforms Through Reduced Trials Support Costs (-£30m) &amp; Reduced Cost of Capital Charges (-£20m), but Offset by an Increase in Programme Costs Identified Through the Annual Financial Planning Process (+£4m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+44
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>
Increase in the Principal Anti-Air Missile System in-Year Costs Due to Exchange Rate (+£23m) and an Increase in the Principal AntiAir Missile System Planning Round 2009 Costs for Exchange Rate (+£21m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+2
</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>
Additional Type 45 Ship Costs Due to Higher than Anticipated Escalation of Contractual Variation
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
On Price (VOP) Indices (+£2m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-49
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
<td>
As a Direct Result of a Move of Ship Build from Barrow to Clyde, in Line with Maritime Industrial Strategy Principles, There Has Been an Increase in Overheads for the ‘six Ship Proposal’ Price that is not Directly Attributable to this Project (-£78m). Reduction in Cost of Capital (-£9m) Due to Lower than Expected Cash Expenditure in 2005/06 (Closing Accrual Higher than Estimated). Transfer to Maritime Training Systems Integrated Project Team (-£35m) and Associated Cost of Capital (£1m). Difference in Variation Figures Due to Revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£24m). Adjustment to Previous Years Cost of Capital Figures Due to System Error (+£98m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-38
</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary Priorities
</Td>
<td>
Equipment Programme 2007 Savings Measure to Reduce the Quantity of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Missiles (-£30m). a Combination of Equipment Plan Options Plus Internal Adjustments, and Cost of Capital. the Options Were: Re-Profiling of the Contract for Demonstration and Manufacture (Approved Six-Ship Programme);
Re-Profiling of the (Planned) Twelve Ship Programme; Reducing the Scope of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Missile Buy and Costs of Shipbuilders’ Premium (+£91m). Increases to the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Contract and Additional Funding and Increases in Delay and Dislocation Money (+£177m). Incremental Acquisition Programme Re-Profiling and Incremental Acquisition Programme Upgrade Deleted (-
£238m). Equipment Plan Options Re-Profiling Costs for Ships Five and Six and Deferring Ships Seven and Eight (+£2m) and the Associated Cost of Capital (+£12m). Correction to Forecast: Costs Wrongly Attributed to Ships Seven &amp; Eight (+£26m). the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Increased Cost of Longbow Mooring (+£4m). Cost of Capital Associated with Estimated Cost Growth of Ship Batch 2 Reported at MPR04 (+£54m). Cost of Capital Relating to the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Increased Cost (Exchange Rate) and Re-Profiling (+£10m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Factor
</Td>
<td>
Explanation
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Savings in Ships Capability (Performance) to Bring Costs Back to Equipment Programme 2005 Baseline; Combat Systems Risk Provision (-£60m), Whole Life Support (Support Solution Study) (-£21m) and Incremental Acquisition Programme (-£64m). Revised Estimate of Westinghouse RollsRoyce 21 Engine Concept/Assessment Phase (-£1m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+1460
</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>
Estimated Increase in Ship Build Cost Based on an Assessment of the
'Six Ship Proposal' Price from the Prime Contractor (+£462m). Estimated Increase in Ship Build Cost (+£184m) and Associated Cost of Capital (+£18m). Costs Omitted from Equipment Programme 2005 and MPR05 Relating to Increase in Ship Build Cost (+£52m) and Associated Cost of Capital (+£5m). Higher than Expected Costs for the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Production Equipment (+£124m). Corrections to Warship Costs (+£13m). Expected Increase in Costs of Elements of Batch Two Ships which are yet to be Negotiated (+£250m). Corrections and Adjustments to Forecast Costs (+£97m). the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Missiles Reinstated (+£173m). Increase in Cost of Capital Due to Corrections to Principal Anti-Air Missile System (+£82m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+55
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>
Pound to Euro Rate Worse than Originally Forecast (+£47m). the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Exchange Rate (Impact of Rate at Equipment Programme 2005) (+£8m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+36
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Issues Arising from Migrating from Skynet 4 to Skynet 5 and to Implement System Growth (+£3m). Increase in Cost of Capital Resulting from in-Service Date Slippage (+£33m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-475
</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>
Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate (£506m). Increase in Risk Due to Recalculation of Cost of Capital (+£31m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
+989
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

| Description   |                                                        |
|------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Type 45 Destroyer | Request for Additional Funding Through Planning Round. |

## B.4. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Unit Production Costs (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
582
</Td>
<td>
651
</Td>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td>
6
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost</Th>
<th>forecast Cost</Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Initial Spares</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Full Support</Td>
<td>968</Td>
<td>958</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

### B.5.1.1. Type 45 Destroyer Date Variation (£m) Factor Reason for Variation

The Impact of Agreeing and Placing Contracting

March 2010 -4 Support Contracts at a Lower Cost

Process than Originally Estimated. Steady State Spares Holdings are

Contracting Now Forecast to be less than Those

March 2010 -6

Process Assumed in the Main Investment Decision Approval.

Net Variation -10

### B.5.2. Operational Impact of Support / Service / PFI Cost Variations

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>t45 Full Support</Td>
<td>
No Operational Impact is Expected as the Reduced Spares Holdings will Still Allow the Ships to Meet their Required Operational Availability.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 48%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2009</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2010</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>232</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>232</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>4794</Td>
<td>509</Td>
<td>5303</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>8</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>65</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure (£m)</Td>
<td>5034</Td>
<td>566</Td>
<td>5600</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
July 2000
</Td>
<td>
July 1991
</Td>
<td>
108 <a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A>
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">this Aligns with the Derived Date for Initial Gate Above. Type 45 is a Legacy Project Building on the Assessment Work Carried Out in Phase 1 of the Collaborative Horizon Project..<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
May 2007
</Td>
<td>november 2007</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
The Date to which the First of Class will Meet the Customer's Minimum Operational Requirement.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

| Description   | Approved Date | Actual / Forecast Date | Variation | in-Year Variation |
|--------------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|-------------|
| Type 45 Destroyer | November 2007     | July 2010                  | +32           | 0                     |
| Total         |                   |                            | +32           | 0                     |

### C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1. Type 45 Destroyer

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-4
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Retirement of Programme Risk (E.g. 2 Successful Principal AntiAir Missile System Missile Firings, Daring Accepted Off Contract) Now Reflected in Latest Timescale Risk Analysis which Indicated in-
Service Date Achievable 4 Months Earlier than Previously Anticipated.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+24
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>
Longer than Expected Design Phase Plus an Acknowledgement that a Number of Other Factors which Had Impacted Earlier in the Programme Had Injected Unrecoverable Delay. These Factors Were Principally Related to Delays in Agreeing the Original Industrial Strategy; Problems Associated with Managing Parallel and Dependant Development Programmes and a Better Understanding of the Programme to Deliver in-Service Date. (MPR02 +6 Months; MPR04 +18 Months).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+18
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Latest Timescale Risk Analysis Founded on Data from Six Ship
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date</Td>
<td>
Variation (Months)
</Td>
<td>
Factor
</Td>
<td>
Explanation
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Proposal from BAE Systems (+11 Months). Refinement of Timescale Risk Analysis Shows that There are a Number of Opportunities in the Programme which Support a Most Likely Date of December 2009. Principal among These is the Opportunity for Parallel Working that is not yet Fully Exploited Within Industry’s Plan and the Potential to Use the Second Ship to Demonstrate Elements of First of Class Capability (-1 Month). Impact of Slippage to SAMPSON Programme and Measures Taken to Mitigate the Full Impact of that Delay (+3 Months). Assessment Based on Full Timescale Risk Analysis (Conducted Jointly with BAE Systems) which Gave a Most Likely Date of March 2010, Based on Baseline Programme. Agreement Reached with Company and Customer 1, However, on How Stage 2 Trials Programme can be De-Scoped Thereby Giving a Most Likely Date of October 2009 (+ 2 Months). Latest Assessment Based on Timescale Risk Analysis of Most Up to Date Programme Reflecting Descoping of Trials Programme (+3 Months).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-6
</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>
Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimate at Main Gate (-6 Months).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
+32
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost / - Saving)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>- 4</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Improved Estimate as a Result of Recent Studies
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Additional Maintenance Periods Required to Run-on Type 42 Destroyer for 11 Months<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A>
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">relates to Slippage in in-Service Date of Type 45 First of Class Only, to Align with the Definition of in-Service Date at Section 3a.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

Type 45 Destroyer

Historic

+1

Additional

Maintenance

Periods Required

To Run-on Type

42

Destroyer for

7

Months.

Type 45 Destroyer

+196

Historic

Additional Type

Run-on Costs

42

Due to Type 45

Slippage.

Total

+195

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
Delay in in-Service Date Further Extends the Period Before a Capability to Defeat Multiple Attacks by Sea-Skimming Missiles will be Available, as Well as the Capability for Royal Navy Escorts to Provide Tactical Control of Combat Aircraft.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
Full Operating Capability will Occur when all Systems are at Full System Acceptance, the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Full Capability Has Been Delivered and all Environmental Trials are Complete. for Ship 1 Full Operating Capability will Occur after in-Service Date.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.4.2. Progress Report – not Applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract

### C.5.1. Scope of Support / Service / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Initial Spares</Td>
<td>
Contract for Purchase of Long Lead Time Spares and Industrial Mobilisation Activities
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Full Support</Td>
<td>
Up to Seven Years’ of Support for Type 45 Platform Equipments and some Complex Equipments
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>variation (Month)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation

(Month)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Initial Spares</Td>
<td>
June 2008
</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Full Support</Td>
<td>
April 2009
</Td>
<td>
September 2009
</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>
5
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1. Go-Live Date Variation

Date Variation Factor Reason for Variation

Type 45 Initial Spares - - -

5 Month Delay in Placing Full

Procurement Support Contract Caused by

5

Processes Extended Contract Negotiations and

Type 45 Full Support Legal Review of Proposed Contract

Net Variation +5

### C.5.3. Progress Against Approved End of Support / Service / PFI Contract Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>
Actual Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Initial Spares</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Full Support</Td>
<td>
November
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>2017</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1. End of Contract Date Variation – not Applicable

### C.5.4. Operational Impact of Support / Service / PFI Support Contract Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>delay in Placing Type 45 Full Support Contract</Td>
<td>
The Delay in Placing the Support Contract Resulted in Reducing the Contract Mobilisation Period. There is No Operational Impact to HMS Daring as the Ship is not Due to Enter Service until July 2010. the Ship is not Planned to Deploy Operationally until 2011.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

### D.1.1. Type 45 Destroyer

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>maturity Area</Th>
<th>maturity Scale</Th>
<th>last Years Assessment</Th>
<th>current Assessment</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>commercial</Td>
<td Rowspan="3"></Td>
<td Colspan="3" Rowspan="3">
<em>measures under Development</Em>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>financial</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project Management</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Readiness</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
Main Investment Decision Approval Achieved Prior to the Introduction of System Readiness Levels
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technology Readiness</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
Main Investment Decision Approval Achieved Prior to the Introduction of Technology Readiness Levels -
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Not Required for Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2" Rowspan="2">
Line of Development
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
Description
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">forecast</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
To be Met
</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>
Not to be Met
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
33. Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Type 45 Platform Including the Principal Anti-Air Missile System
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">2 Training</Td>
<td>
Provision of First of Class and Steady State Training For: Weapons Engineer;
Marine Engineer; Warfare and the Principal Anti-Air Missile System. Also Provision of Collective Training
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">3 Logistics</Td>
<td>
Investment Approval Board Submission; Unit Maintenance Management System; Tech. Docs.;
Initial Provision Lists and First Outfit;
Tooling; Support Data Pack; Support Solution Envelope; Principal Anti-Air Missile System &amp; Long Range Radar;
Information Management System
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">4 Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Appropriate Facilities for Type 45 to be Available at the Following:
Her Majesty's Naval Base Portsmouth; Her Majesty's Naval Base Devonport; Her Majesty's Naval Base Clyde; Defence Storage and Distribution Agency Gosport
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">5 Personnel</Td>
<td>
Provision of Manpower (the Crew) for all 6 Ships
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">6 Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Enable Type 45 to Undertake Assigned
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Operations.; Enable Type 45 Air Defence Activity; Tactical Advice for Use of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Command and Control, Aster Missile System and Combat Management System; Capability Upgrades are Enabled Through Platform Life
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>organisation</Td>
<td>
Maintenance of Type 45 in-Service Date and Type 42 Paying Off Plan.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Included Within the Equipment Defence Lines of Development for Type 45
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
100%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>january 10</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
The Key Remaining Risk is Against Aster Missile Reliability. Investigation Continues Through the Tri-National Principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme, Mitigation Includes Further Test Firings and a UK Salvo Firing in June 2010.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>january 10</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
The Key Remaining Risk is the Delivery of Steady State Training for Marine Engineering, Sea Viper and Warfare Maritime Composite Training System. Steady State Training Should be Available During 2011, but this is Currently Being Mitigated Through Interim Training Measures.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>january 10</Td>
<td>
Logistics
</Td>
<td>
Technical and Commercial Factors
</Td>
<td>
The Key Remaining Risk is that the Sea Viper in-Service Support Contract will not be in Place for HMS Daring in-Service Date. This Affects the Availability of HMS Daring’s Sea Viper System, which is Being Mitigated by Interim Contractual Arrangements. a Further Consequence of the Aster Missile Reliability Issue is the Availability of the Aster Missile Stockpile. This Risk is to be Tolerated until a Revised Delivery Profile is Received from the Sea Viper Programme, at which Time Further Mitigation may be Possible.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>january 10</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
The Key Remaining Risk is the Ability to Maintain the Aster Missile Stockpile. This Requires Provision of a Dedicated UK Missile Maintenance Installation which is Due to be Installed Within Defence Storage and Distribution Agency Gosport and Available in 2014. This Risk, which is Based on Missile Shelf Life, is to be Tolerated with Careful Stockpile Management as Reworked Missiles are Delivered.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
The Key Remaining Risk is the Testing and Integration of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System. This will be Mitigated Through Further Test Firings and Naval Weapons Sea Trials During 2009.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
The Key Remaining Risk is the Timely Delivery of Marine Engineering Shored-Based Training for Dauntless. This is Being Mitigated Through the Delivery of Customised Courses Making Use of Training Material Already Produced for Daring’s Crew, Augmented by the Increased Use of Onboard Training.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Key Remaining Risk is the Timely Provision of an Aster Capable Missile Loading Facility in

Portsmouth. the Late Provision of this Facility Would be Mitigated by the Use of Alternative Missile Loading Facilities at Either Marchwood Military Port Near Southampton or Glen Mallen Near Glasgow.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Type 45 Destroyer

### D.3.1.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Principal Anti-Air Missile System. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Protect with a Probability of Escaping Hit of {w}, all Units Operating Within a Radius of {x}, Against Up to {y} Supersonic Sea Skimming Missiles Arriving Randomly Within {z} Seconds.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Force Anti-Air Warfare Situational Awareness. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Assess the Air Warfare Tactical Situation of 1000 Air Real World Objects Against a Total Arrival and/or Departure Rate of 500 Air Real World Objects per Hour.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Aircraft Control. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Provide Close Tactical Control to at Least 4 Fixed Wing Aircraft, or 4 Groups of Aircraft in Single Speaking Units, Assigned to the Force.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Aircraft Operation. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Operate both One Organic Merlin (Anti-Submarine Warfare and Utility Variants) and One Organic Lynx Mk8 Helicopter, Although not Simultaneously.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Embarked Military Force. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Operate an Embarked Military Force of at Least 30 Deployable Troops.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Naval Diplomacy. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Coerce Potential Adversaries into Compliance with the Wishes of Her Majesty's Government or the Wider International Community Through the Presence of a Medium Calibre Gun System of at Least 114mm.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Range. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Transit at
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>least 3000 Nautical Miles to Its Assigned Mission, Operate for 3 Days and Return to Point of Origin, Unsupported Throughout, Within 20 Days.</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>08</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>growth Potential. the Type 45 Capability Shall be Able to be Upgraded to Incorporate New Capabilities or to Enhance Extant Capabilities Through Displacement Margins of at Least 11.5%.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>09</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>availability. the Type 45 Shall Have a 70%
Availability to Contribute to Maritime Operations over a Period of at Least 25 Years, of which at Least 35% Shall be Spent at Sea.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Measure)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>january 2010</Td>
<td>
KUR1
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Most Recent Principal Anti-Air Missile System Test Firings Did not Meet all of their Planned Objectives. the Key Remaining Risk is Therefore Against Aster Missile Reliability. Investigation Continues Through the Tri-National Principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
KUR 2
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
When MPR07 Was Compiled the Extant Version of Combat Management System Software Had Insufficient Capability to Fully Satisfy Key User Requirements 2 and 3. the Decision Was Made During MPR08 Reporting Period to Upgrade the Combat Management System Software, which Increased Functionality and Fully Satisfied Key User Requirements 2 and 3.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
KUR 2
</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary Priorities
</Td>
<td>
Revised Programme to Achieve Earliest Possible in-Service Date Leads to a Lower Level of Combat Management System Functionality at in-Service Date.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
KUR 3
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
When MPR07 Was Compiled the Extant Version of Combat Management System Software Had Insufficient Capability to Fully Satisfy Key User Requirements 2 and 3. the Decision Was Made During MPR08 Reporting Period to Upgrade the Combat Management System Software, which Increased Functionality and Fully Satisfied Key User Requirements 2 and 3.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
KUR 3
</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary Priorities
</Td>
<td>
Revised Programme to Achieve Earliest Possible in-Service Date Leads to a Lower Level of Combat Management System Functionality at in-Service Date.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
KUR 4
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Integrated Project Team &amp; Director of Equipment Capability Agreed to Conduct "First of Class Flying Trials" with a Merlin. This will Remove the Expectation that at InService Date Only Lynx Capability
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>will Have Been Demonstrated. Ability to Operate Lynx but not Merlin will be Demonstrated by Full Operating Capability in-Service Date. Merlin will be Demonstrated Beyond in-Service Date</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KPM
</Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Status
</Th>
<th>
Operational Impact of Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
KUR1
</Td>
<td>
January 2010
</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>none. HMS Daring is not Due to Enter Service until July 2010. the Ship is not Planned to Deploy Operationally until 2011.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2. Support Contract

### D.3.2.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Attributable Ship Availability Factor. an Overall Assessment of the Ability of the Class of Ships to Undertake their Planned Operational Tasks.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>02</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Ship Material State. an Assessment, Conducted Prior to Operational Training, of the Actual Condition of the Equipment on Each Ship.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>03</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Safety Performance. a Measure of the Number of Safety Items Whose Mitigation Plans or Completion Dates are Overdue.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>04</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Maintenance Clearance Rate. a Measure of the Number of Outstanding Maintenance Items at the End of Formal Maintenance Opportunities.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>05</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Support Service Responsiveness. a Measure of the Number of Requests for Support that are Overdue for Closure Beyond their Agreed Target Date.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>06</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Sustainability/Continuous Improvement. a Measure of the Work Undertaken to Improve the Support Service Through a Continuous Improvement Programme Aimed at Reducing Support Costs and/or Increasing Ship Availability.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation – not Applicable

### D.3.2.3. Operational Impact of Variation – not Applicable

TYPHOON

Team Responsible

Typhoon

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability (Theatre Airspace)

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Capability (Theatre Airspace)

Number of Projects / Increments 3

Current Status of Projects / Increments

-   Post Main Investment Decision – Typhoon Platform, Typhoon Future Capability Programme

-   Support Contract – Typhoon Support

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Typhoon

Typhoon, Formerly Known as Eurofighter, is an Agile Multi-Role Combat Aircraft. Originally Designed Primarily, but not Exclusively, for Air Superiority the Aircraft is also Capable of Delivering a Precision Ground Attack Capability. Typhoon Has the Flexibility to Respond to the Uncertain Demands of the Current Strategic Environment and is Progressively Replacing the Tornado F3 and Jaguar Aircraft.

The Aircraft is Being Developed, Produced and Supported in a Collaborative Project with Germany, Italy and Spain. the Project is Managed on Behalf of the Four Partner Nations by the NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency. to Date, Contracts Have Been Placed for the RAF to Receive 160 Aircraft in Three Tranches. Typhoon Support is Being Delivered Through the Letting of Long-Term Contracts Against Five Areas of Support.

Typhoon Future Capability Programme

The Typhoon Future Capability Programme will Provide Enhancements to the Typhoon Aircraft, both in the Air-to-Air and Air-to-Surface Roles, to Sustain the RAF’s Typhoon Fleet’s Multi-Role Capabilities.

The First Phase of the Future Capability Programme, under a Contract Signed in March 2007, will Integrate Paveway IV and the Litening III Laser Designator Pod Onto Tranche 2 Aircraft from 2012 as Well as Interoperability Upgrades without which Those Aircraft will be Neither Compliant with New Civil Airspace Regulations nor Interoperable with Key Coalition Allies. It will also Provide the Human Machine Interface for Multi-Role Operations, Allowing Typhoon to Fulfil Air-to-Air and Air-to-Surface Operations with the Current, Planned and Projected Weapons.

The Second Phase of the Future Capability Programme is Planned as Part of the MOD’s Future Defence Programme Announced in December 2009.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Typhoon

Pre-Development, which Commenced with the Approval of the Feasibility Study in 1984, Comprised a Number of Activities. Following Early Concept Studies, and Various Efforts at Establishing a Collaborative Programme, There Were Two Key Typhoon Demonstration Activities Completed by the UK Before Development: The Experimental Aircraft Programme, an Airframe Programme Primarily Aimed at Proving the Feasibility of the Typhoon Unstable Flight Control Concepts, and the XG40 Engine Demonstrator Programme at Rolls Royce. the Results of These Demonstrators and their Associated Studies, Together with the Results of Similar Work Within the Other Nations Were Harmonised in a Definition, Refinement and Risk Reduction Phase that Ran from the End of 1985 when Four Nations Signed the Initial Memorandum of Understanding, until 1988 when the Development Contract Was Signed.

Typhoon Future Capability Programme

The Approval Process for Typhoon Tranche 2 Noted the Intention to Develop the Capability of the Aircraft Through Life and Envisaged an Incremental Route to the Acquisition of Future Capability
