---
year: 2010.0
project_type: Post-Main Gate Projects
project: Beyond Visual Range Air to Air Missile
page_from: 88.0
page_to: 96.0
project_label: Beyond Visual Range Air to Air Missile
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2010_88_96.md
---
Team Responsible

Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability - Theatre Airspace

Senior Responsible Officer

N/A

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision – N/A • Post Main Investment Decision – Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile • Support Contract – N/A • Other – please provide details – N/A

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile system (the selected equipment is the Meteor system) will provide Typhoon with the capability to combat projected air-to-air threats and sustain air superiority throughout the life of the aircraft. The integration of Meteor onto Typhoon forms part of the project, with a current Initial Operating Capability of 2015.

Until Meteor is integrated, Typhoon will be armed with the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile, acquired from Raytheon Missile Systems.

Key features of the Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile requirement include stealthy launch, enhanced kinematics (giving increased stand-off and disengagement ranges, a better ability to engage and destroy highly agile manoeuvring targets), a large no-escape zone and robust performance against countermeasures.

This is a collaborative programme with: Germany, Spain and Italy (for Typhoon), Sweden (for Gripen) and France (for Rafale).

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

On 2 October 1995, Minister (Defence Procurement) gave approval for the issue of an Invitation to

Tender for Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile. The Invitation to Tender was issued on 5

December 1995. Two bids were received; one from a consortium led by Matra BAe Dynamics UK Ltd (now MBDA UK Ltd), and one from Raytheon Systems Ltd. After extensive analysis, it was decided that both bids contained areas of risk that needed to be addressed before a development and production contract could be placed. In May 1997, a Project Definition & Risk reduction phase was approved and contracts were placed on both bidders for a period of one year, with results to be technically and operationally assessed before a final decision was made. Both Project Definition & Risk reduction contracts were let in August 1997 and revised bids were received in May 1998.Due to the complexity of the Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile assessment, the need to accommodate the requirements of the Prospective Partner Nations and the need to go for ‘Best and Final’ Offers (primarily as a result of a French request to join the programme), Main Gate Approval was not achieved until May 2000. In his statement to the House of Commons on 16 May 2000, the Secretary of State announced that the Matra BAe Dynamics Meteor missile had been selected.

## A.3. Progress

The contract for the demonstration, manufacture and support of Meteor was placed with MBDA UK Ltd on 23 December 2002. To date only the UK has committed to production; however the contract includes production options that can be exercised by partner nations during the demonstration phase and all nations have stated that they are planning towards committing to production by the end of 2010.

The Meteor programme has progressed from the development standard of missile, to a nearproduction variant, and has started a comprehensive proving programme consisting of modelling, ground trials, air carriage trials and guided firings, the first of which was completed during June 2009. These activities will generate the evidence against which the missile will be accepted up to the end of the Development programme.

Eurofighter GmbH were given authorisation in July 2009 to begin preliminary Typhoon missile carriage and release work, the first step towards full integration. The full integration as part of a wider enhancement package is being developed in support of achieving In-Service Date 2 in 2015, with a priced proposal received and being evaluated.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Meteor capability is required to replace the current AIM-120 Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air

Missile whose capability falls significantly below that of Meteor. The procurement of the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile was a temporary solution to provide Typhoon’s anti-air capability for the period between Typhoon Operational Employment Date (June 2007) and Meteor In-Service Date. Whilst the continued use of the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile is not expected to affect peacetime air policing, the survivability and capability of Typhoon in almost all operational roles will be compromised by non-delivery of Meteor. It will also necessitate an extension to the life of existing Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile missiles beyond the currently supported date, and will introduce a risk that stock levels will be insufficient to meet the operational needs. Should Meteor integration slip, there will be a need to address any gap in the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile capability.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Typhoon</td>
<td>
Typhoon Future Capability Programme 2
</td>
<td>
July 2015
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="4">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td colspan="3">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>Contract Type</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
MBDA UK Ltd (Meteor)
</td>
<td>
Demonstration (all 6 nations) and Manufacture (United Kingdom only at present)
</td>
<td>
Firm price up to June 2007 (Demonstration), Firm Price up to June 2006 (Manufacture), Fixed Price thereafter subject to Variation of Price
</td>
<td>
International competition
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile</td>
<td>
Raytheon Missile Systems (Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile)
</td>
<td>
Manufacture to In-Service
</td>
<td>
Firm price
</td>
<td>
Non-
competitive
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

### A.7.1. Support / Service / PFI Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th colspan="4"></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">It is currently envisaged that Meteor will be supported through Contractor Logistic Support arrangements, covering Post Design Services, Repairs and Surveillance and Life Extension. The final agreed strategy is dependent upon the outcome of the reliability trials within the development programme and information and decisions from the Meteor Partner Nations. The current forecast is that these inputs will be available in time to inform a support strategy submission to the approval authorities in during 2011.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>14</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>+6</td>
<td>1%</td>
<td>2%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration & Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</td>
<td>
1198
</td>
<td>
1240
</td>
<td>
1362
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 46%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th>Actual /
Forecast cost (£m)</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>In-Year

Variation

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</td>
<td>1362</td>
<td>1305</td>
<td>-57</td>
<td>+23</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation against approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>October 2009</td>
<td>-13</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Re-assessment of Meteor Integration (-£4m). Re-assessment in UK Technical Support / GFE (£8m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>August 2009</td>
<td>+13</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Benefit of achieving Prime Contract Milestones at reduced VAT rate (£2m). Difference in variation due to revision of Cost of Capital charge (+£15m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>August 2009</td>
<td>+23</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>
Change in Euro and Krona exchange rate on Meteor Prime Contract (+22m). Revaluation of
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th></th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>
foreign currency assumptions on provision of Target service in support of Meteor Firing trials (+1m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+3
</td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</td>
<td>
Change in Euro exchange rate on Meteor Prime Contract (+3m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+48
</td>
<td>
Accounting

Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Change in assumption in regard to recovery of VAT (+£9m), Derivation of approved cost on resource basis (-£4m), Difference in variation due to revision of Cost of Capital charge (-£11m). Correction of treatment in Contracted Out Services VAT from previous years to align with Main Gate Approval (+£3m). Revision of Cost of Capital charge due to revised delivery profile (+£51m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
-72
</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary Priorities
</td>
<td>
In consultation with the customer the decision has been taken to examine capability trade-offs while Realignment and Integration proposals are being matured and assessed against the requirement (-£36m). Effect of Equipment Planning 05 Options: reduce Meteor numbers (-£55m), decision taken not to upgrade AIM-120B Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missiles to C-standard (-£65m). Re-costing of UK Technical Support requirements in addition to Memorandum Of Understanding commitments (+£3m). Re-costing of Meteor Integration (-£1m). Increases for Insensitive Munitions (+£9m). Missiles &amp; Ancillary Equipment in Support of Typhoon Integration (+£6m). Surveillance &amp;
Life Extension (+£5m). Initial Spares (+£3m). Container Development (+£1m). Container Production (+£1m). Support to Typhoon Integration (+£2m). Revised deliveries of Meteor Missiles (+£12m). Container Logistics Support for Meteor (+£7m). Production Investment (+£1m). Trial Ranger (+£11m). Increase in Unit Production Cost for Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile missiles (MPR03 +£25m;
MPR04 +£15m). Surveillance Spares for Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile (+£1m). UK share of Government Furnished Equipment (+£6m). Decrease for Service Evaluation Trials for Meteor (-£7m). Integration of Meteor onto Typhoon (-£9m), Production of Meteor Telemetred Operational Missiles (-£1m), In Service Reliability Demonstration
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th></th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>
exchange rate on Meteor Technical Support contracts (£1m). .
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
-120
</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>
UK share of additional common requirement (+£2m), additional requirement for Dual Date Link (+£6m), additional containers required for Meteor (+£2m), refurbishment of existing Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missiles (-
£16m). Re-costing of Meteor Missile Additional Acquisition (£2m). Reduction in missile numbers to minimum contractual commitments (-£53m). Reassessment of In Service Evaluation Trials for Meteor (-£19m). Re-assessment of Meteor Integration (-£40m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+55
</td>
<td>
Change in associated project
</td>
<td>
UK support to Development Guided Firing campaign on Gripen (+£6m). UK support to Tornado F3 Alternative trials platform (+£3m). UK share of “Realignment”
programme due to the nonavailability of Typhoon aircraft for Meteor Development Trials programme (+£46m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
-16
</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>
UK’s share of MBDA revalidation of prices caused by delay in contract placement (+£6m). Revalidation to reflect prices within Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile contract (-£14m), and effect of revalidation on Cost of Capital Charge (-£8m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+30
</td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</td>
<td>
Change in Euro exchange rate on Meteor prime (+£29m). Change in Dollar exchange rate on Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile (£11m). Revaluation of foreign currency assumptions on current and future Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile contracts (+£9m). Revaluation of foreign currency assumptions on Meteor Prime Contract (+£3m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+114
</td>
<td>Procurement Strategy</td>
<td>
Revaluation of UK’s share of Government Furnished Equipment/ Government Furnished Facilities requirements (-£20m). Additional funding required for integration of AIM-120C Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missiles onto Typhoon (+£82m). Gripen Trial (+£2m). Realism measure on funding for integration of AIM-120C Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missiles onto Typhoon (-£65m). Decrease in UK’s share of Development (-£30m). Increase of UK’s share of development through transfer of
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Date

Variation (£m)

Factor

Reason for Variation

work share from Germany (+£31m)

and UK share of Government

Furnished Equipment (+£1m). UK

share of Memorandum Of

Understanding Technical Support

requirements (+£2m). UK share of

Memorandum Of Understanding

Government Furnished Equipment

requirements (+£7m). Revised

Variation of Price associated with

deliveries of Meteor Missiles

(+

£27m). Reduction in technical

support to Advanced Medium

Range Air-to-Air Missile (-£5m).

Prime Contractor supporting

Typhoon Integration Programme

(+

£20m). UK contractual

commitment to pre-production

activities (+£5m). Cost associated

with UK’s contractual commitment

to minimum Production quantities

(+

£57m).

Historic

-122

Risk Differential

Difference between the risk allowed

for in the most likely (50%) and the

highest acceptance (90%)

estimates at Main Gate

(-

£129m), Variation due to revised

approval figures (+£7m).

Total

-57

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 67%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.4. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th colspan="2">
Unit production costs (£m)
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities required
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</th>
<th>
Currently
</th>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</th>
<th>
Currently
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
1.0
</td>
<td>
2.1
</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – Not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 48%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Previous expenditure to 31 March 2009</th>
<th>In-year expenditure</th>
<th>Total expenditure to 31 March 2010</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase (£m)</td>
<td>20</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>20</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</td>
<td>541</td>
<td>136</td>
<td>677</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure (£m)</td>
<td>561</td>
<td>136</td>
<td>697</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</td>
<td>May 2000</td>
<td>October 1995</td>
<td>55</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Earliest

Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (Original In-Service Date)</td>
<td>
June 2010
</td>
<td>
September 2011
</td>
<td>August 2012</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (InService Date 2)</td>
<td>
February 2015
</td>
<td>
July 2015
</td>
<td>
July 2015
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>In Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
Original In-Service Date Definition: Achievement of an operational capability with  missiles and supporting infrastructure. At MPR 2007 forecast In-Service Date was August 2013, against the approved InService Date at Main Gate of August 2012. The In-Service Date definition was redefined in 2008, following a review of the programme to reflect a two-stage approach to delivering the capability, as follows:
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
In-Service Date 1: (Platform Ready): A fully developed missile standard ready for delivery and platform integration, having demonstrated achievement of In-Service Date 1 Key Performance Measures
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
In-Service Date 2: Initial Operating Capability (Typhoon Meteor Capability): The first Front Line Unit is declared Operational with at least  missiles and having demonstrated achievement of In-Service Date 2 Key Performance Measures.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.2. Progress against approved Dates

| Description          | Approved Date | Actual / Forecast Date | Variation | In-Year Variation |
|---------------------|-------------|---------------|------------|-------------|
| Original In-Service Date | August 2012       | August 2013                | +12           | \-                    |
| In-Service Date 1        | August 2012       | August 2012                | 0             | 0                     |
| In-Service Date 2        | July 2015         | July 2015                  | 0             | 0                     |
| Total                |                   |                            | 0         | 0                 |

### C.3.3. Timescale variation

### C.3.3.1. Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile -– variations against original In-Service Date definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th></th>
<th>
Variation
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+15
</td>
<td>
Change in associated project
</td>
<td>
Typhoon integration delays cannot be absorbed and uncertainty over Typhoon Future Capability Programme (+15 months).
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Slippage caused by delays in placing contract (+11 months).

Reassessment of opportunities

Contracting arising from Meteor Realignment

Historic +8

Process activities, to reduce the duration of firing trial campaigns and to de-risk transition from Demonstration to Production phases (-3 months). Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the

Historic -11 Risk Differential

highest (90%) estimates approved at Main Gate (-11 months).

Net Variation +12

### C.3.4. Other costs resulting from Timescale variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Date</th>
<th>£m (+ Cost / - Saving)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for expenditure or saving</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Change in associated project</td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+5</td>
<td>Change in associated project</td>
<td>
Extension to the life of the current Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile variant until integration of Meteor onto Typhoon is achieved (+£5m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>+5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
Extended reliance on the current AIM-120 Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile. The capability of the latter falls significantly below that of Meteor: its procurement was a temporary solution to provide Typhoon with an anti-air capability for the period between Typhoon Operational Employment Date and Meteor In-Service Date. Whilst the In-Service Date delay is not expected to affect peacetime air policing, the survivability and capability of Typhoon in almost all operational roles would be compromised by an extended delay. A staged transfer from Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile to Meteor is necessary owing to the latter’s delivery profile, and hence use of Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile by Typhoon extends beyond Meteor InService Date. There is some risk that part of the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile stocks will not endure until the revised InService Date and hence we may fall below the minimum required stockpile liability, although this cannot be confirmed at present.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
The full exploitation of the Meteor capabilities by the Typhoon platform. This includes a two way datalink, a full six-missile fit and the full use of Meteor symbology and cockpit functionality.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
### C.4.2. Progress Report
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td>
Full Operating Capability
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Beyond Visual Range Airto-Air Missile</td>
<td>
The option of proceeding to Full Operating Capability will be considered in due course in the light of further threat analysis
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

### D.1.1. Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Maturity Area</th>
<th>Maturity Scale</th>
<th>Last Years Assessment</th>
<th>Current Assessment</th>
<th>Comments</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Commercial</td>
<td rowspan="3"></td>
<td colspan="3" rowspan="3">
<em>Measures under development</em>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Financial</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Project Management</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Readiness</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td rowspan="2">
Main Gate was prior to the requirement to monitor readiness levels
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Technology Readiness</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.2. Performance against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Not required for pre-Main Investment Decision Projects</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Line of Development</td>
<td rowspan="2">Description</td>
<td colspan="3">Forecast</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
To be met
</td>
<td>
At Risk
</td>
<td>Not to be met</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>9. Equipment</td>
<td>
Integrated Meteor missile, support eqpt
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10. Training</td>
<td>Industry led training for in-service users</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11. Logistics</td>
<td>
Industrial support for in-service use
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12. Infrastructure</td>
<td>
Defence Estate prepared to support
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13. Personnel</td>
<td>
Supply of sufficient qualified personnel
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>14. Doctrine</td>
<td>
Principles for capability employment
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15. Organisation</td>
<td>
Establishing organisational relationship
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>16. Information</td>
<td>
Identifying data,information, knowledge
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td colspan="3">100%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td colspan="3">N/A</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile

### D.3.1.1. Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
KPM
</th>
<th rowspan="2">LOD</th>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th></th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>To be met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>
Information
</td>
<td>
Multiple Target Capability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>
Doctrine
</td>
<td>
Kill Probability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>
Doctrine
</td>
<td>
Enhanced Typhoon Survivability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>
Equipment
</td>
<td>
Typhoon Compatibility
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>
Logistics
</td>
<td>
Minimum Air Carriage Life
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>
Logistics
</td>
<td>
Reliability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>
Logistics
</td>
<td>
Support
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td>100%</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation – not applicable

### D.3.3. Support Contract – not applicable

Team Responsible
