---
year: 2009.0
project_type: Pre-Main Investment Decision
project: Dabinett
page_from: 292.0
page_to: 296.0
project_label: Solomon (formerly Dabinet)
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2009_292_296.md
---
Dabinett

Team Responsible

Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Systems Engineering and Programme Organisation

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Director Equipment Capability Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance

Senior Responsible Officer

Director Equipment Capability Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision - Dabinett

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

Defence requires an effective and efficient end-to-end Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance service including a UK-commanded deep and persistent collection capability. This will provide actionable information and intelligence to inform decision makers through a capability that is interoperable in a joint, inter-agency, and multi-national environment, in support of an agreed range of Military Tasks out to 2035. Dabinett has identified capability gaps in two areas: Direct, Process and Disseminate relating to the integrated delivery of Intelligence; and Deep and Persistent relating to collection of intelligence. The Dabinett programme was established in order to significantly improve the efficiency, effectiveness, quality and timeliness of intelligence delivered to the commander primarily by making better use of legacy systems but also through the introduction of new capability across all the Defence Lines of Development.

Background

Dabinett was originally scoped as a replacement to the Canberra PR9 aircraft used for tactical reconnaissance and photographic mapping. In 2005 the Acquisition for Network Enabled Capability and Dabinett Programme Integrated Project Team was formed to deliver the £1.3bn project. Lessons identified from theatre at this time, continued to focus on the inefficient use of the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance inventory. Furthermore, analysis from Operation Telic indicated that information was already available to answer 80- 90% of the collection requirements raised. This led to more emphasis being placed on Dabinett to improve the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance process, Direct, Collect, Process and Disseminate rather than merely replacing a tactical reconnaissance and photographic mapping aircraft. However, the requirement to replace the Canberra remained and was, therefore, satisfied by funding being released from Dabinett to part-fund the acquisition of the Reaper Unmanned Air Vehicle.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

The Programme is in a continuous Assessment Phase that will initiate a number of projects, with their own lifecycles, over a series of phases to deliver the full capability identified for Dabinett.

Background

In May 2005, the Dabinett Concept Phase began. Initially this was planned to result in the delivery of a single Initial Gate Business Case for a monolithic Category A project. As the complexity of Dabinett became clear, it was apparent that the Dabinett capability would need to be managed through a programme approach that would coherently deliver a series of projects across all Defence Lines of Development. This change of approach and an extension to the Concept Phase was approved in June 2007. One aspect of this new approach was the adoption of a programme that would remain in continual assessment delivering benefits through a variety of projects. Initial Gate for the Programme was approved by the Investment Approvals Board in March 2008. This approval launched Dabinett, and the Concept Phase for the first set of projects was also initiated.

|     |
|-----|

The Programme consists of both equipment and non-equipment Defence Lines of Development projects. Each equipment project is expected to go through a normal equipment project cycle with funding provided from the Dabinett line.

A unique element of the Initial Gate approval was the formulation of the Project Categorisation and Initiation Board. As approved in the Initial Gate Business Case, the establishment of this board will enable all future Dabinett projects to obtain approval to be initiated without the need for a full submission. This mechanism enables a more flexible and efficient approach to delivering the Programme and is intended to sit annually to continue momentum.

## A.3. Progress

Initial Gate approval was granted in March 2008 and a programme office was established to provide support and drive forward the Programme in line with the Office of Government Commerce best practice guidance.

The four Phase I projects were initiated with the intention of transferring full project management activities to delivery Integrated Project Teams after the projects had passed through Initial Gate. However, resource restrictions across Defence Equipment and Support resulted in the programme office having to continue with full project management of these activities. This led to a re-scheduling of resources and uplifts to supporting contracts in order to retain the requisite levels of effort necessary to maintain work to the Programme plan.

In October 2008 the inaugural Project Categorisation and Initiation Board was held and saw the initiation of the Phase II projects, to be managed by the programme office Project Managers. This coincided with MOD review of its equipment programme in the light of emerging and changing priorities. This review has prioritised more resources to those capabilities that support current operations and helped bring the defence equipment programme more closely into balance. As part of the review, only one of the four Phase I projects met the immediate requirement for support to current operations. As a result, the Initial Gate Business Cases for the other three, the concept phase for the Phase II projects and the refresh of the contract support to Dabinett’s Programme Support Office were put on hold.

In December 2008 the sponsor directed that the programme office revise the Delivery Strategy to the effect that Dabinett will be delivered in three phases, the first of which must deliver by \\\ in order to maximise the immediate operational benefit to the Front Line Commands. Phase II is to build on the output delivered in Phase I, thereby minimising the resource expended on developmental effort . This is to be achieved without change to the agreed user requirement or consume additional funds. The prioritisation of capability delivered is to meet the users’ requirements based on the Dabinett benefits model.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The focus of the Dabinett Programme is on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance processes and capabilities. Without Dabinett, collector assets will continue to be tasked to answer requests for Information and Intelligence that already exist within the intelligence community. Dabinett will meet the de-confliction and prioritisation shortfalls of the current UK Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance capability.

The delivery of an enhanced End to End UK Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and

Reconnaissance capability is fundamental to the success of future Military operations. Information and intelligence is essential in all aspects of modern operations and thus provides the bedrock for decision making. Dabinett will ensure that information and intelligence is effectively and efficiently available for exploitation at all levels of command.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>A secure and coherent information infrastructure for Defence</td>
<td>
Defence Information Infrastructure (Future) Secret and Above Secret
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>One assured, fully integrated and efficient core communications network and infrastructure for Defence.</td>
<td>
Future Core Networks
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 3%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Description</td>
<td colspan="3">Procurement Route</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Contractor support to the Programme Support Office, will be re-competed in 2009.
</td>
<td colspan="3">
Competitive
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
RJD Technology Ltd – Provide technical support to the Joint Mission Support Centre Concept Capability Demonstrator. This will complete in 2009.
</td>
<td colspan="3">
Non-competitive
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Vega Group – Specifically provide direct support to the Requirement Manager. This will be competed in 2009.
</td>
<td colspan="3">
Non-competitive
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Communications – Electronics Security Group.
</td>
<td colspan="3">
Non competitive
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Detica .
</td>
<td colspan="3">Non-competitive</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Phase 1
</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Phase 2
</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Phase 3
</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a proportion of total

estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Programme Support Office (first four years)</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase/PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Lowest Forecast /

Approved (£m)
</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)(£m)</th>
<th>Highest Forecast /
Approved (£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Programme</td>
<td></td>
<td>
<u>-</u>
</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost – not applicable

## B.5. Progress against approved Support/PFI Cost – not applicable

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual Date of Main Gate

Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Programme Support Office (first four years)</td>
<td></td>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Phase 1</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Phase 2</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Phase 3</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In Service Date – not applicable

## C.4. Initial Operating Capability – not applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability – not applicable

## C.6. Support Contract – not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels – not applicable

## D.2. Performance against Lines of Development – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures – not applicable
