---
year: 2007.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: BRIMSTONE
page_from: 43.0
page_to: 50.0
project_label: BRIMSTONE
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2007_43_50.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

BRIMSTONE

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

AIR LAUNCHED MUNITIONS

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The Advanced Air-launched Anti-Armour Weapon (AAAW), known as Brimstone, is designed to reduce the fighting power of enemy armoured forces as early and as far forward as possible. It replaces the BL755 cluster bomb in the anti-armour role, and will be carried by Tornado GR4/4a, Harrier GR9 and Typhoon. These fixed-wing aircraft will complement the capability provided by the Apache AH64-D, which is armed with the Hellfire anti-armour weapon. Brimstone operates autonomously after launch, which helps reduce the hazard to the attacking aircraft from enemy fire. The longer reach and speed of deployment of fixed-wing aircraft mean that they can engage armour far beyond the battlefield area, and before it can join the contact battle.

Following an international competition an AAAW development and production contract was let in

November 1996 to GEC-Marconi Radar and Defence Systems (later Alenia Marconi Systems, now MBDA) for the BRIMSTONE system. The In-Service date for Brimstone was declared on 31 March 2005.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

| Contractor(s) | Contract Scope        | Contract Type | Procurement Route      |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| MBDA UK Ltd       | Development / Manufacture | Firm price        | International competition. |

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
899
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
814
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+85
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-1
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>February 2007</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Reduction in Cost of Capital Charge due to earlier deliveries than anticipated in the original forecast (-£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+104</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Reduction in Cost of Capital Charge due to earlier deliveries than anticipated in the original forecast (-£31m). Increase in Harrier integration costs to cover BAES costs for Capability D (+£12m). Reassessment of Development activities (-£4m); reassessment of Tornado Integration Requirements (+£2m); and Harrier Integration Requirements (-£3m); reassessment of level of QinetiQ Support (-£3m). Non provision of Government Furnished Equipment (i.e. Tornado GR4) to contractor (+£9m). Increase in Tornado integration costs for 2002/03(+£4m). Increase in Cost of Capital due to slippage in deliveries (MPR02 +£40m; MPR03 +£64m and MPR04 +£14m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-14</td>
<td>Receipts</td>
<td>Receipt from Liquidated Damages due to late delivery of missiles. (-£3m).  (-£10m). Receipt from Liquidated Damages due to late delivery of missiles (-£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>Variation (£m)</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-4</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Removal of Typhoon integration costs as advised by Customer 1 (-£8m). Delay to ISD, milestone payment and Typhoon Integration (+£4m). Reduction of missile quantity by 25% (-£49m). Increase in EP03 provision relating to 25% missile reduction (+£49m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>Reduction in launcher quantities and Service Weapon Test Sets (-£3m); deletion of Tornado Inboard Pylon (-£1m); additional requirements for Emulators (+£4m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+16</td>
<td>Inflation</td>
<td>Difference between the inflation assumed at contract let and the GDP deflators from the time of approval (+£14m); difference between GDP and inflation on the main contract since placement (+£2m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>Change in US Dollar exchange rate quoted in the contract (-£6m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-10</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Changes due to conversion of cash based approvals and contract details to resource basis (-£3m). Increase in Cost of Capital due to the inclusion of Harrier/Tornado costs (+£6m). Change to take account of an adjustment to the current forecast cost to previous MPRs, reflecting the availability of more accurate data (MPR01 +£13m and MPR04 -£20m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£6m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+85</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</th>
<th>
883
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
1999/2000
</td>
<td>
2005/2006
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

| ISD Definition: | Delivery of first \\\ weapons and associated equipment to a front-line unit and declaration that the unit is operational. |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------|

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
March 2005
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
September 2001
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+42
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>Equipment Capability Customer request to bring Brimstone ISD into line with that of Tornado GR4/4a (+12 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+17</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Safety problems resulting from the "2<sup>nd</sup> Pass" issue (ie the risk of the missile falling back into the aircraft after launch) halted flying during its investigation (MPR03 +6 months, MPR04 +5 months). Delay in signing Certificate of Design due to testing the modification of the autopilot software (+6 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+1</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Delay in letting contract with Alenia Marconi Systems as pricing negotiations took longer than anticipated (+1 month).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>Change in Associated Project</td>
<td>Delay in provision of trials aircraft (ie Tornado GR4) (+12 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+42</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Other
</td>
<td>
19
</td>
<td>
5
</td>
<td>Support cost for Brimstone (-£5m). Additional costs to modify BL755 (+£11m). Urgent Operational Requirement for further modifications to BL755 (+£8m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Total
</td>
<td>
+14
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

The ISD delay of 42 months results in the lack of a fully effective anti-armour capability and the runon of BL755 in the anti-armour role. However, 12 months of the delay were necessary to align Brimstone ISD with the availability of its Tornado GR4/4a platform.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>Carriage, launch and jettison from Tornado GR4/4a, Harrier GR9 and Typhoon.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>Autonomous operation after launch.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>Detection and attack of Main Battle Tanks, Armoured Personnel Carriers and Self Propelled Guns.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>Kill probability as defined in System Requirement Specification (SRS).</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>Launch from high and low altitude.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>Resistance to active and passive countermeasures.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>Component lives as defined in SRS.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>Compatibility with existing aircraft loads.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>Reliability, Maintainability and Testability as SRS.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</td>
<td>Minimum Through-life costs.</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td colspan="2">100 %</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

| Date | Key Requirement | Factor | Explanation |
|----------|---------------------|------------|-----------------|
| \-       | \-                  | \-         | \-              |

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Approval was given for feasibility studies to be carried out in 1982. However, during Options for Change, programme funding was withdrawn while alternatives for a future anti-armour capability were considered. The project was reinstated in 1993 and the revised Staff Requirement, for an Advanced Air-launched Anti-armour Weapon (AAAW), was presented to the Equipment Approvals Committee early in 1994.

In June 1994, the Equipment Approvals Committee gave approval for an Invitation to Tender (ITT) to be issued to industry for an AAAW. Following issue of the ITT in December 1994, proposals were received from GEC Marconi, Hunting Engineering, Texas Instruments, Thorn EMI and British Aerospace.

Following full technical and commercial assessment of the proposals a further tender round took place in January 1996. This concentrated on the commercial aspects of the bids in line with revised timescales and production quantity requirements.

The tender assessment was completed in February 1996 with the findings being presented to the Equipment Approvals Committee. Brimstone was found to have superior relative performance by a comfortable margin and also provided the most cost-effective solution. In July 1996 the Secretary of State for Defence announced that GEC Marconi had won the AAAW competition with its Brimstone weapon, and would be awarded the contract to develop and produce the weapon system.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase cost
</th>
<th>Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Actual Cost</td>
<td>
23
</td>
<td>
2.5%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
20
</td>
<td>
2.2%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+3
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
March 1996
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
814
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Forecast ISD at Main Gate
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
September 2001
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
December 1991
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
