---
Year: 2009.0
Project_type: Support Projects
Project: Tornado
Page_from: 95.0
Page_to: 102.0
Project_label: Tornado
Project_type_label: Support Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2009_95_102.md
---
Tornado

Project

Tornado

Team Responsible

Tornado Integrated Project Team

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

\-

Senior Responsible Officer

\-

Number of Projects / Increments 2

Current Status of Projects

• Support/Service/PFI - Availability Transformation Tornado Aircraft Contract, RB199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The UK Tornado Fleet is Fundamental to the Delivery of Air Power into the Future. the GR4 (Strike Attack/Reconnaissance) and F3 (Air Defence) Aircraft Require Support until their Out-of Service Dates. Meeting New Funding Targets Resulted in Making the Original Support Solution Unaffordable and a Partnering Approach with BAE Systems and Rolls-Royce Defence Aerospace Was Selected to Reduce the Cost of Tornado Support by more than Half. a Single Contract Was Placed with Each Company to Provide Platform and Engine Availability. These Contracts Provide the Required Support until the Aircraft Out-of Service Date and Meanwhile are Flexible to Changes in Defence Planning.

The Requirement is to Deliver an Integrated Support Solution for the Tornado GR4 and F3 Fleets. the Solution Must Meet the Authorised and Funded Requirements for Training and Operations and Facilitate the Cost-Effective Insertion of New Capability. the Scope of the Support Service Must Include the Provision of on-Aircraft Depth Support and Off-Aircraft Spares, Repair, Training and Technical Support. Key to this is the Need to Provide Depth Support to Sustain Operational Deployments and this is a Fundamental Building Block of the New Contracts.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase – not Applicable

## A.3. Progress

The Availability Transformation Tornado Aircraft Contract (ATTAC) Was Let on 21 December 2006 with a Second Phase to Complete the Scope in November 2007. It is a Life of Type Contract with Five Years’ Firm Pricing then Five Years’ Fixed Pricing with Re-Pricing and Re-Negotiation of the Contract at Five Yearly Intervals. the First Renegotiation is Due in December 2011. Within the Funding Available, the Contract Was Constrained to an Average 80% of Required Flying Task over the Ten Years, with an Aspiration to Increase if and when Funding Becomes Available.

The RB199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation (ROCET) Was Let on 14 December 2005 for Five Years and Requires Re-Negotiation by December 2010.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Failure of Either the Availability Transformation Tornado Aircraft Contract or RB199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation Would Severely Impact the Availability of Tornado Aircraft to the Front Line and Support to Operations.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy – not Applicable

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
The Contracts are for Total System Availability, Allocating Integration Risk where it is Best Managed and Offering the Best Prospect of Significant Improvement in Output via Open Book Arrangements for Joint Partnering Agreements. Risk and Its Associated Price Contingency Allowance is Cascaded to the Suppliers, not Held or Duplicated by BAE Systems and Rolls-Royce Defence Aerospace. Both Companies Have a Significant Footprint with a Small Number of Suppliers Supporting the Majority of Sub-Systems Across a Number of Platforms. This Potential will be Exploited Through Aggregation of the Requirement to Achieve Maximum Leverage and Best Value. Incentivisation, by Linking Profit and Performance, will be Used to Achieve Low Maintenance Down Times and High Reliability.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems
</Td>
<td>tornado Inservice Support</Td>
<td>firm/Fixed Plus Incentive</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
RB199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation
</Td>
<td>
Rolls Royce
</Td>
<td>engine in-Service Support</Td>
<td>firm/Fixed Plus Incentive</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase – not Applicable

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Assessment Phase/PFI –
Not Applicable

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not Applicable

## B.4. Unit Production Cost – not Applicable

## B.5. Performance Against Approved Support/PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract</Td>
<td>
1,193
</Td>
<td>
1,257
</Td>
<td>
+64
</Td>
<td>
+66
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>rb199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation</Td>
<td>
470
</Td>
<td>
468
</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td>
+109
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>
1663
</Td>
<td>
1725
</Td>
<td>
+62
</Td>
<td>
+175
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support/PFI Cost

### B.5.1.1. Availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract Date Variation (£m) Factor Reason for Variation

March 2009 +4 Exchange Rate Change in Euro Exchange Rate

February 2009 +55 Budgetary Factors Increased Output from 2013 to 2017

Conflict

June 2008 +7 Support to Operations

Prevention Fund

Conflict Recovery from Conflict Prevention

June 2008 -7

Prevention Fund Fund.

June 2008 +7 Budgetary Factors Buy-Out of Service Manpower

Payment of Government Furnished

Historic +6 Budgetary Factors

Liabilities under the Contract

Conflict

Historic +13 Support to Operations

Prevention Fund

Conflict Recovery from Conflict Prevention

Historic -13

Prevention Fund Fund.

Historic +2 Budgetary Factors Buy-Out of Service Manpower

Changed

Inclusion of Support to Successor

Historic +2 Capability

Identification Friend or Foe

Requirements

Removal of Training and

Historic -12 Budgetary Factors

Collaborative Costs from Contract

Net Variation +62

### B.5.1.2. RB199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>may 2008</Td>
<td>
+109
</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary Priorities
</Td>
<td>
Increase in Output Required Against the RAF Management Plan
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-111
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>
Reduction in Contracted Costs
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.1.3. Operational Impact of Support/PFI Cost Variations

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase – not Applicable

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability
– not Applicable

## C.3. in Service Date – not Applicable

## C.4. Initial Operating Capability – not Applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability – not Applicable

## C.6. Support Contract

### C.6.1. Scope of Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract</Td>
<td>
Tornado Specific Logistic Support (Except Engines), Including Aircraft Maintenance, Provision of Spares and Technical Services.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>rb199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation</Td>
<td>
All Tornado Engine Specific Logistic Support.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.2. Performance Against Approved Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual/Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract</Td>
<td>
December 2007
</Td>
<td>
November 2007
</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>rb199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation</Td>
<td>
December 2007
</Td>
<td>
December 2005
</Td>
<td>-24</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.2.1. Go-Live Date Variation

### C.6.2.1.1. Availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>
Reduction in Time Taken to Negotiate Contract.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
# C.6.2.1.2.
</Td>
<td Colspan="4">rb199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Date
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Variation (Months)
</Td>
<td>
Factor
</Td>
<td>
Reason for Variation
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-24
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>
Reduction in Time Taken to Negotiate Contract.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.3. Performance Against Approved End of Contract Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual/Forecas t Date</Th>
<th>variation (Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract</Td>
<td>
December 2016
</Td>
<td>
December 2016
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>rb199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation</Td>
<td>
December 2010
</Td>
<td>
December 2010
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.3.1. End of Contract Date Variation

Date

Variation

Months)

(

Factor

Reason for Variation

\-

\-

\-

\-

Net Variation

-

### C.6.4. Operational Impact of Support Contract Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>availability Transformation: Tornado Aircraft Contract</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>rb199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels

### D.1.1. Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 54%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>readiness Levels</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
Readiness Area
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Rowspan="2">comments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>level</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technology</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
Readiness Levels Were not Required when this Project Passed Through Main Gate for Demonstration and Manufacture. No (Re)Assessment is Required at Main Gate for Support.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
System Readiness Levels are not Currently Mandated for Approvals
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">line of Development</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Forecast
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
To be Met
</Th>
<th>at Risk</Th>
<th>not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Provision of Tornado GR4 and F3 Aircraft and Equipment.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Provision of Trained Personnel to Support the Tornado Force.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
Provision of Logistic Support for Tornado GR4 and F3 Aircraft, Including Maintenance, Storage and Distribution.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Provision of Infrastructure Including Buildings and Structures, Facilities and IT to Support the Tornado Force.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Provision of Sufficient, Capable and Motivated Personnel to the Tornado Force.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
This Line of Development is not Currently Measured.
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Provision of the Operational and Nonoperational Force Structure to Support the Tornado Force.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
This Line of Development is not Currently Measured.
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">percentage of Those Measured Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>
RAF Manpower Diverted to Higher Priority Operational Tasks.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>
Lack of Available RAF and Subcontractor Manpower.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Project – not Applicable

Part 3 Page 49 of 281

### D.3.2. Support Contract

### D.3.2.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">lod</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>at Risk</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Availability Transformation:
Tornado Aircraft Contract KPM 1
</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Maintain a Bank of Available Flying

Hours for the Actual Available Fleet to Agreed Contractual Targets</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Availability Transformation:
Tornado Aircraft Contract KPM 2
</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>manage Spares for all Tornado Aircraft at Forward and for F3 Depth to Agreed Contractual Targets</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Availability Transformation:
Tornado Aircraft Contract KPM 3
</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>the Provision of a Technical Support Service to all Tornado Aircraft at Forward and to F3 Depth Measured as the % of Enquiries Answered Within the Target Time</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Safety
</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>provision and Maintenance of the Tornado Project Team Safety Case</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
RB199 Operational Contract for Engine Transformation
</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>meet Targets for Engine Forward Availability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Measure
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3. Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Status
</Th>
<th>
Operational Impact of Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Part 3 Page 50 of 281

Part B – Post-Main Investment Decision Projects

Part 3 Page 51 of 281
