---
year: 2007.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: BOWMAN
page_from: 35.0
page_to: 42.0
project_label: Bowman
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2007_35_42.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

BOWMAN

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

BOWMAN AND TACTICAL COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION SYSTEM (BATCIS)

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Command, Control & Information Infrastructure)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application programme (BCIP) will provide a secure tactical voice and data communications system for all three Services in support of land, littoral and air manoeuvre operations. It will replace the increasingly obsolete Clansman combat radio system and the Headquarters infrastructure element of the Ptarmigan trunk system. BCIP comprises of a series of incremental upgrades such as BCIP4, BCIP5.

In September 2001, following international competition, General Dynamics United Kingdom Ltd was awarded the Bowman Supply and Support contract as prime contractor, and conducted its own competition among sub-contractors. On the basis of Brigade scale operational field trials Bowman achieved its In-Service Date (ISD) on 26 March 2004. In 2005, the first converted brigade deployed to Iraq on Operation TELIC, with a core Bowman capability alongside its residual Clansman capability. Continued operational experience indicates that Bowman is delivering a battle winning capability. Littoral Manoeuvre (amphibious) Operational Readiness Date was declared in December 2005 and planning continues to declare Land and Air Manoeuvre operational readiness.

During 2005, a review of the BCIP programme provided the opportunity to better ensure that it would deliver a capability consistent with the MoD’s vision of achieving Network Enabled Capability. A Review Note was approved in July 2006 and formal offer of contract for the
‘recast’ programme was accepted by the prime contractor. A validation phase has begun that will define a number of risk reduced options that will inform a MoD Main Gate submission, in mid 2008, for future capability enhancements.

By 31 December 2006, 7,000 platforms had been converted and conversion of all available platforms to BCIP 4.f is expected by December 2007. Dependent on a successful Brigade Operational Field Trial 3 in October 2007 and Acceptance & Release decision in December 2007, fielding of BCIP5 is expected to take place from January 2008.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>General Dynamics UK Ltd</td>
<td>Demonstration and Manufacture</td>
<td>Firm Price</td>
<td>International Competition</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
2009
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
2041
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
<td>
-32
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-10
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Includes correction to cost of capital charge arising from mis-stated balance in previous MPR<a href="fnref1"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Revised prices as a result of activities completing at a lesser cost than originally estimated.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>-8</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>Items acquired under contract now provided as new requirements to other projects</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+2</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Increase in Cost of Capital Charge (COCC) arising from mis-stated closing balance in previous MPR</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Funding brought forward to reflect contractor progress. COCC reductions (-£6m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+120</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Technical requirements re-evaluated (+£90m). Associated reprofile of funding and asset balances resulted in increased COCC (+£30m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-29</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>Additional Technical requirements not scoped as part of the original supply and support contract (+£61m). Technical support requirements not originally included in Main Gate approval (+£10m). Additional Technical requirements not covered under terms of Supply and Support contract (+£16m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>Variation (£m)</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Removal of requirements to be accounted for as separate projects (-£17m). Estimated impact of Total Fleet requirements (-£17m). Additional Technical requirements not covered under terms of Supply and Support contract (+ £5m). Items acquired under contract now provided as new requirements to other projects (-£73m). Support related activity incorrectly included in forecast (-£14m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+15</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Revised prices for Global Positioning System Modules (+£3m). Difference between approved D&amp;M cost at Main Gate and Contract Price (+£12m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+8</td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</td>
<td>Contract Incentivisation for achieving key events leading to ISD (+£8m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+11</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Cost of Capital Charge (COCC) reduced due to accounting for deliveries ahead of programmed profile.(-£17m). Figure adjusted following error of +£5m in MPR05. Reprofile of funding and asset balances resulted in increased COCC (+£23m). COSVAT adjustment (+£5m)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-143</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate (-£143m). Figure adjusted following error of -£5m in MPR05.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-32</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</th>
<th>
2015
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>2004/2005</th>
<th>
2005/2006
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

| Unit Production Cost (£m) |             | Quantities Required      |                              |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| at Main Gate              | Current | at Main Gate             | Current                  |
| \-                            | \-          | 48000 radios of varying type | 43000 radios of varying type |

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

| ISD Definition: | A Brigade Headquarters, two mechanized battalions and support troops capable of engaging in Operations Other than War. |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------|

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
March 2004
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
December 2004
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-9
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-9</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-9</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 35%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Type of Cost/Saving
</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">3e. Operational impact of ISD variation</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>KUR Serial</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Forecast to be Met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>
Secure Voice.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>
Secure Data.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>
Automatic Position Location, Navigation and Reporting service (APLNR).
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>
Security.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>
Ease of Use.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>
Provide automated system management enabling support to the full spectrum of operations.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>
Data Communications Infrastructure.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>
Support the Common Infrastructure for Battlefield Information Systems concept and provide a common operating environment for Digitization Stage 2.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>09</td>
<td>
Allow the free-flow of data and voice within and between vehicles, groups of stationary vehicles, and other systems.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10</td>
<td>
Provide a secure and robust tactical internet service making efficient use of limited bandwidth.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11</td>
<td>
BOWMAN is to support current operational C2 doctrine, practice, deployment and battle procedure.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12</td>
<td>
BOWMAN is to provide interfaces to other key battlefield communication systems used at the tactical level.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13</td>
<td>
BOWMAN equipment is to meet a level of survivability consistent with its physical environment and mission criticality for 95% of users in 95%
of likely climatic conditions.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>14</td>
<td>
Make effective, robust use of the Electro-Magnetic Spectrum without degrading other systems.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>15</td>
<td>
BOWMAN is to provide working installations in all platforms designated as containing BOWMAN equipment, except for ships, WAH-64 and Lynx aircraft for which equipment is to be provided but not installed.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>16</td>
<td>
Health and Safety.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>17</td>
<td>
Supportability.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>18</td>
<td>
Training.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>19</td>
<td>
BOWMAN is to supply sufficient scales of equipment and services to meet the needs of those forces taking part in or supporting land operations, as structures at End of Supply (EOS).
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td colspan="2">100 %</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>April 2006</td>
<td>KUR 12 –
Interoperability</td>
<td>Technical</td>
<td>New solution agreed and developed to meet the performance standard. To be trialled during operational field trials.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 01 – Secure Voice</td>
<td>Technical</td>
<td>User continues to experience voice/voice arbitration interference. Technical solution, whilst tested in the laboratory, will be tested at scale during operational field trials.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Bowman was first approved in 1988, when it was expected to have the equivalent of Main Gate in 1993 and ISD in 1995. After Feasibility Stage 1 in 1993, contracts were placed with two competing consortia for Feasibility Stage 2 (FS2) and Project Definition Stage 1.

FS2 indicated that the risk of procuring and integrating the Local Area Sub-system (LAS) would be best managed by placing the responsibility with the Bowman contractor. This change in procurement strategy was approved in 1997, along with Bowman Core Risk Reduction work.

In November 1996, the previous two consortia formed a joint venture company, Archer

Communications Systems Ltd (ACSL) to submit a joint bid for Bowman. The Department approved a single source strategy for Bowman following a review of procurement options. A risk reduction contract was placed with ACSL in August 1997. ACSL received a further package of work in October 1998 worth £182M prior to production commitment at Main Gate, then planned for November 2000.

The Department rejected ACSL’s bid in July 2000, removed their preferred supplier status and relaunched the competition, as it was not convinced ACSL could meet an early ISD. TRW Ltd, Computing Devices Canada Ltd (CDC), now General Dynamics UK Ltd, and Thales Defence Ltd competed for the contract, which was won by CDC in July 2001. The Equipment Approvals Committee gave Main Gate approval in August 2001 and the Bowman Supply and Support contract was signed on 13 September 2001.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase cost
</th>
<th>Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Actual Cost</td>
<td>
397
</td>
<td>
16.5%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
130
</td>
<td>
6.1%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+267
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
August 2001
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase (months)</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>
1874
</td>
<td>
1898
</td>
<td>
2041
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
February 2004
</td>
<td>March 2004</td>
<td>
December 2004
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 1995
</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
