---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Assessment phase projects
project: Solomon (formerly Dabinet)
page_from: 310.0
page_to: 315.0
project_label: Solomon (formerly Dabinet)
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2011_310_315.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 56%" />
<col style="width: 43%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project Title</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Solomon Programme</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td rowspan="2"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Team Responsible</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Receonnaissance Programme Support Function 1</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td rowspan="2"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Senior Responsible Owner</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Head of Capability Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Name</td>
<td>Current Status of Projects / Increments</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Solomon</td>
<td>Pre-Main Investment Decision</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp;
Management Project</td>
<td>Pre-Main Investment Decision</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

# A.1 The Requirement

The Department requires an effective and efficient end-to-end Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance service. This will provide actionable information and intelligence to inform decision makers through a capability that is interoperable in a joint, inter-agency, and multi-national environment, in support of an agreed range of Military Tasks out to 2035. The Department identified capability gaps in two areas: Direct, Process and Disseminate relating to the integrated delivery of Intelligence; and Deep and Persistent relating to collection of intelligence. The Solomon (at the time known as Dabinett) Programme was established in order to address these capability gaps and in doing so to significantly improve the efficiency, effectiveness, quality and timeliness of intelligence delivered to the commander primarily by making better use of legacy systems but also through the introduction of new capability across all the Defence Lines of Development.

Background

Solomon was originally scoped as a replacement to the Canberra PR9 aircraft used for tactical reconnaissance and photographic mapping. In 2005 the Acquisition for Network Enabled Capability and Dabinett Programme Integrated Project Team was formed to deliver the project. Lessons identified from theatre at this time continued to focus on the inefficient use of the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance inventory. Furthermore, analysis from operations in Iraq indicated that information was already available to answer 80-
90% of the collection requirements raised. This led to more emphasis being placed on Solomon to improve the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance process, Direct, Collect, Process and Disseminate rather than merely replacing a tactical reconnaissance and photographic mapping aircraft.

In March 2010 Dabinett was renamed Solomon.

# A.2 The Assessment Phase

The Programme is in a continuous Assessment Phase that will initiate a number of projects, with their own lifecycles, over several phases to deliver over time the full capability identified for Solomon.

The first of these projects is the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration & Management project which is currently in its Assessment Phase.

A Through Life Capability Management approach is being used to manage the Solomon Programme.

Programme Support

The £8M over four years allocated to the Solomon Programme continuous Assessment Phase element has been used to provide technical support to the programme such as:

1.  Undertaking benefits analysis of the programme.

2.  Undertaking effectiveness modelling to support the programme.

3.  Supporting Programme Planning/Optimisation through Capability and Programme Investigations.

Parallel Activities

In addition to the Programme Support activities a number of programme-level activities with separate approvals which contribute to, and are funded by, the Solomon Programme. These are:

Project Abime is a 2-year development of the Electronic Surveillance Mission Support Environment to de-risk and inform the Joint Electronic Surveillance Centre and Single Signals Intelligence Battlespace via an Operational Capability Demonstrator (approval £1.835m).

Project Diamond is an Operational Concept Demonstrator to support sharing of tactical reconnaissance imagery between the UK and another nation, (approval £4.369m).

Multi-Sensor Aerospace-Ground Joint Interoperable Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance Coalition – Co-ordination of UK participation in a 9-nation led system to better share tactical imagery intelligence,

~Enter\ Text\ Here~(approval £1.852m).

Empire Challenge – Co-ordination of UK participation in a US-led annual trial to test the integration of intelligence systems to share information and inform Phase 2 Projects, (approval £0.508m).

Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Defence Lines of Development Co-ordination Project which is de-risking non Equipment lines of development for the programme, (approval
£1.930m).

Geospatial Intelligence Information Service, a Capability Concept Demonstrator (approval £0.542m). Geospatial Intelligence Information Service demonstrates the web-based dissemination of products produced by Defence Geographic Centre and the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office.

# A.3 Progress

Solomon is currently planned to deliver over a number of phases.

Phase 1

The Intelligence Information Integration & Management project is the only project in Phase 1 of the Programme. It passed Initial Gate in April 2009. In February 2010 two competitive Assessment Phase contracts were placed with preferred bidder selected in late 2010. The Main Gate planned for December 2010 has been re-scheduled for May 2011.

Phase 2 onwards

During 2010/11 Defence Intelligence provided a Single Intelligence Environment requirements definition paper which aligned the provision of capability to the desired MOD military requirement in 2015 and 2020 .The Strategic Defence and Security Review took these changes forward which revised the funding profile.

An option to reduce funding on Direct Process and Disseminate Projects in years 1 to 10 has been taken. A further option to defer £25 million from year 5 to 6 has also been taken. The current forecast for Solomon aligns to the outcome of these options.

# A.4 Capability Risks

The focus of the Solomon Programme is on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance processes and capabilities. Without Solomon, assets that collect intelligence will continue to be tasked to answer requests for Information and Intelligence that already exist within the intelligence community. Solomon will meet the de-confliction and prioritisation shortfalls of the current UK Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance capability.

The delivery of an enhanced End-to-End UK Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance capability is fundamental to the success of future military operations. Information and intelligence is essential in all aspects of modern operations and thus provides the bedrock for decision making. Solomon will ensure that information and intelligence is effectively and efficiently available for exploitation at all levels of command.

# A.5 Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 57%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Title of Associated Project</th>
<th>
Forecast In Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability
</th>
<th>
Approval Status
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Defence Information Infrastructure (Future) Increment 2c</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>Demonstration and Manufacture</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# A.6 Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 57%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th colspan="2">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
<td>Approval Status</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Solomon</td>
<td>Tasks competed through Framework Agreement for Technical Support, a pan-Government arrangement to enable fast and efficient procurement of technical support, Non-competitive through DSTL and Niteworks.</td>
<td>Pre-Main Gate</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp;
Management Project</td>
<td>Competitive Procurement</td>
<td>Pre-Main Gate</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# A.7 Support Strategy

SOLOMON

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/
Increment Title</td>
<td>
Approved Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>as a

proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
<td>Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Solomon</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>7</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissanc e Information Integration &amp;
Management Project</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>12</td>
<td>10</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Solomon</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp;
Management Project</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

2.  Unit production cost/Quantities required

3.  Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

4.  Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</th>
<th>In-year expenditure (£m)</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>8</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

SOLOMON

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Solomon</td>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>Continuous</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp; Management Project</td>
<td>April 2009</td>
<td>May 2011</td>
<td>25</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Solomon</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Information Integration &amp; Management Project</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

2.  Full Operating Capability

3.  Support / Service / PFI Contract

Project Summary Sheet
