---
Year: 2009.0
Project_type: Support Projects
Project: Attack Helicopter
Page_from: 55.0
Page_to: 62.0
Project_label: Attack Helicopter
Project_type_label: Support Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2009_55_62.md
---
Attack Helicopter

Team Responsible

Apache Project Team

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Officer

Director Equipment Capability (Air and Littoral Manoeuvre)

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Support/Service/PFI - Interim Support Arrangement

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Interim Support Arrangement is a Precursor to the Future Support Arrangement. from First Delivery in 2000, the Growing Apache Fleet Was Initially Supported by Contractor Logistic Support on Separate Contracts with AgustaWestland. These Separate Contracts Were Extended to 2007, in Anticipation of the Future Support Arrangement Start Date. However the Future Support Arrangement Has Been Delayed Due to Extended Commercial and Financial Discussions. Crucial in the Case for the Interim Support

Arrangement Was that it Did not Conflict with the Intent and Strategy for the Future Support Arrangement, and the Interim Support Arrangement Contract Had the Ability to Accommodate the Future Support Arrangement if Needed.

Interim Support Arrangement Covers the Following Apache Army Helicopter Mark 1 in Service Support Areas from April 2007, until the Future Support Arrangement is in Place:

Material Flow – Repair and Supply Chain Management.

Aircraft Availability – Depth Support Maintenance and Forward Support to the Training Fleet.

Technical Support Services – Post Design Services.

Management Services – Management Services in Respect of the Contract with Clauses to Enable Project Team Transformation and Development of a Value for Money Benchmark for the Future Support Arrangement.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

There Was No Formal Assessment Phase for the Interim Support Arrangement, However it Was Subjected to a Business Case and Investment Appraisal.

## A.3. Progress

The Interim Support Arrangement Was First Notified by Information Note to the Investment Approvals Board in August 2006.

The Interim Support Arrangement Investment Appraisal and Business Case Were Submitted for Scrutiny to the Defence Logistic Investment Board in January 2007.

The Defence Logistics Investment Board of February 2007 Approved Interim Support Arrangement for a Three Year Contract at a not to Exceed Cost of
£237m Consisting Entirely of Resource Departmental Expenditure Limit at 50% Confidence.

The Investment Approvals Board Was Notified of the Interim Support Arrangement in February 2007. Contract Award Was Made on 28 March 2007 for 01 April 2007 Start. the Interim Support Arrangement is Structured to Fully Meet Obligations in the Customer Supplier Agreement (Now Joint Business Agreement), which Includes Supporting Operations, and Facilitates Progress Towards the Future Support Arrangement.

Claims for in-Service Support Against the Conflict Prevention Fund for the Apache Attack Helicopter Have Been less than £3m to Date.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Apache Attack Helicopter Capability Could not be Sustained without the Provision of in Service Support. Without the Interim Support Arrangement, Aircraft Availability and Flying Rates Would Drop to Zero Very Quickly. the Interim Support Arrangement Provides Support Required in Order that the Apache can Fulfil Its Operational Mission. if the Interim Support Arrangement Was Withdrawn, an Alternative Support Solution Would Have to be Put in Place, Possibly at Increased Cost.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy – not Applicable

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Apache Army Helicopter Mark 1 Was Procured Through a United Kingdom Prime Contractor, AgustaWestland, with Tier 1 United States of America Equipment Manufacturers for the Airframe (Boeing), Sensors (Lockheed Martin Overseas Company) and Fire Control Radar (LongBow International). Other Major United Kingdom Equipment Manufacturers Provided the Engines (Rolls Royce), Transmissions (Westland Transmissions Limited) and Helicopter Integrated Defensive Aid Suite (Selex). Munitions Were Procured Through Lockheed Martin Insys and a Separate Public Finance Initiative Contract by Aviation Training International Limited Provided the Training Service, which Runs for 30 Years with a Break Point at 2017 to Allow the Contract to be Renegotiated. Original Equipment Manufacturers are Now the Suppliers to the Prime Contractor for in Service Support Covered by the Interim Support Arrangement, Providing:
Management Services Material Flow – Repair and Spares Provisioning Aircraft Availability – Through Depth Support and Forward Support to the Training Fleet. Technical Support Services - Post Design Services &amp;
Airworthiness
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Interim Support Arrangement
</Td>
<td>agustawestland (Formerly Westland Helicopters Limited) (Prime Contractor)</Td>
<td>
In Service
</Td>
<td>
Fixed Price Core Service
</Td>
<td>
Single Tender
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Interim Support Arrangement
</Td>
<td>boeing (Subcontractor)</Td>
<td>
In Service
</Td>
<td>
Fixed Price
</Td>
<td>
Single Tender
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase – not Applicable

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase/PFI – not Applicable

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not Applicable

## B.4. Unit Production Cost – not Applicable

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>interim Support Arrangement</Td>
<td>
237
</Td>
<td>
222
</Td>
<td>
-15
</Td>
<td>
+8
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

### B.5.1.1. Interim Support Arrangement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2009</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>procurement Process</Td>
<td>
In-Year Variation Due to Contract Amendments of Core Payments Financial Year 2008/2009
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2009</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
Anticipated Roll-over of Tasks into Financial Year 2010/2011
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2009</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
Anticipated Volume Variance in Tasks Financial Year 2009/2010
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2009</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
Volume Variance in Tasks Financial Year 2008/2009
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2009</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>
Forecast Exchange Variance Financial Year 2009/2010
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2009</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>
Foreign Exchange Variance Financial Year 2008/2009
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
Volume Variance in Tasks Financial Year 2007/2008
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-16</Td>
<td>procurement Process</Td>
<td>
Savings Achieved in Negotiation of Core Payments
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-15</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.2. Operational Impact of Support / Service / PFI Cost Variations

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>interim Support Arrangement</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase – not Applicable

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability
– not Applicable

## C.3. in Service Date– not Applicable

## C.4. Initial Operating Capability– not Applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability– not Applicable

## C.6. Support / Service / PFI Contract– not Applicable

### C.6.1. Scope of Support / Service / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>interim Support Arrangement</Td>
<td>
Material Flow (Repair and Overhaul) of Capital Assets Inclusive Of:
Sensors and Longbow Radar, as a Service Provision, in the United Kingdom Special Repair Activity Centre at Wattisham. Fixed Menu Prices for Specific Spares Inclusive Repairs, for Boeing (Airframe) and Other Minor Original Equipment Manufacturers. Strip, Survey and Quote for Repair and the Enabling Repair Facilities for the Aircraft Major Transmission Assemblies. Material Flow (Supply) Providing the Supply Chain Functions at Wattisham in Support of the Whole Fleet. Aircraft Availability. Service Provision by Contract Staff of Long-Term Servicings of the Whole Fleet at the Depth Support Maintenance Facility at Wattisham. Forward Support Maintenance to the Training Fleet at Middle Wallop. Technical Support Services, Post Design Services (Technical Repairs and Technical Enquiries) and Enabling the Design Authority to Support the Aircraft Airworthiness. Management Services of the above with Clauses to Enable Project Team Transformation and Development of a Value for Money Benchmark for the Future Support Arrangement.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.2. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date
</Th>
<th>variation (Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>interim Support Arrangement</Td>
<td>
April 2007
</Td>
<td>
April 2007
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.2.1. Go-Live Date Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.3. Progress Against Approved End of Support / Service / PFI Contract Date

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>forecast/Actual Date</Th>
<th>variation (Months)</Th>
<th>variation (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>interim Support Arrangement</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.3.1. End of Contract Date Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (Months)</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.6.4. Operational Impact of Support / Service / PFI Support Contract Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>interim Support Arrangement</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels

### D.1.1. Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 54%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>readiness Levels</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
Readiness Area
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Rowspan="2">comments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>level</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technology</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
Readiness Levels Were not Required when this Project Passed Through Main Gate for Demonstration and Manufacture. No (Re)Assessment is Required at Main Gate for Support.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
System Readiness Levels are not Currently Mandated for Approvals
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2" Rowspan="2">
Line of Development
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
To be Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1.</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Ensure Apache Aircraft Deployed on Operation Herrick Have Requisite, Endorsed Theatre Entry Modifications Embodied and Effective Support to all Platform Munitions is in Place.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2.</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>
Ensure Sufficient, Effective Training Courses are Available, Including Specialist Aircrew, Groundcrew and Maintainer Training.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3.</Td>
<td>
Logistics
</Td>
<td>
Ensure Sufficient, Effective Logistic Support is in Place, to Include Deployable Spares Packs, Logistic Information Systems, Technical Publications, Spares Delivery, Maintenance Reviews, Storage Policy for Apache Aircraft, Including Engines and Munitions. Progress of Future Support Arrangement. Rebuild Aircraft in Storage.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4.</Td>
<td>
Personnel
</Td>
<td>
Ensure Sufficient, Trained Personnel Available to Support the Apache Fleet, Including Army Technical Manpower Rebalancing, Depth Manpower Provision and Achievement of Full Crew Manning.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5.</Td>
<td>
Concepts/ Doctrine
</Td>
<td>
Requirement to Continually Re-Evaluate Apache Concept of Operations and Doctrine and Equipment Support/Logistics Concept of Operations and Doctrine, in Order to Support Current Operations.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6.</Td>
<td>
Organisation/ Infrastructure
</Td>
<td>
Develop the Concept for Apache, Including Wattisham as a Main Operating Base. Complete Industry/MOD Collocation into an Integrated Corporate Working Environment.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7.</Td>
<td>
Information
</Td>
<td>
The Information Line of Development is not Recorded Separately.
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage of Those Measured Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Technical
</Td>
<td>
Risk that Insufficient, Trained Civilian Staff are Available to Deliver Output at Depth Support Unit, Following Withdrawal of Military Manpower in March 2009. Mitigating Action by Agusta Westland Has Been Taken Prior to Contract Implementation, to Recruit and Train Replacement Manpower.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
Concepts/Doctrine
</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirement
</Td>
<td>
A Continual Review of Concept of Operations is Needed to Reflect Current Operations.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
Organisation/ Infrastructure
</Td>
<td>
Technical
</Td>
<td>
Development from New of the Main Operating Base Concept and Structure is Needed; this is Ongoing and not yet Complete.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Project – not Applicable

### D.3.2. Interim Support Arrangement

### D.3.2.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 6%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">kpm</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">lod</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Forecast
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Quantity/Efficiency - Aircraft Provided to Meet the Levels in the Forward Fleet as Set Out in the Joint Business Agreement.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Safety/Airworthiness Risks Managed Satisfactorily.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Availability – Percentage Operational Serviceability Levels Set and Agreed in the Joint Business Agreement.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Aircraft Capability – Aircraft Meets Operational Requirements.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Reliability – Percentage Operational Days Lost Due to Unscheduled Maintenance, Level Set in the Joint Business Agreement.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Maintainability - Percentage Operational Days Lost Due to Scheduled Maintenance, Level Set in the Joint Business Agreement.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Spares - Percentage Operational Days Lost Due to Unavailable Spares, Level Set in the Joint Business Agreement.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Key Measure
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>performance Targets Amended to Reflect Realistic and Incrementally Increasing Performance Levels and Requirements of Aircraft Deployment on Operations. Also Changes Made to Reflect that User Flying Rates and Expectations Were Being Exceeded.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>performance Targets Amended to Reflect Realistic and Incrementally Increasing Performance Levels and Requirements of Aircraft Deployment on Operations. Also Changes Made to Reflect that User Flying Rates and Expectations Were Being Exceeded.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
5
</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>performance Targets Amended to Reflect Realistic and Incrementally Increasing Performance Levels and Requirements of Aircraft Deployment on Operations. Also Changes Made to Reflect that User Flying Rates and Expectations Were Being Exceeded.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>performance Targets Amended to Reflect Realistic and Incrementally Increasing Performance Levels and Requirements of Aircraft Deployment on Operations. Also Changes Made to Reflect that User Flying Rates and Expectations Were Being Exceeded.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>performance Targets Amended to Reflect Realistic and Incrementally Increasing Performance Levels and Requirements of Aircraft Deployment on Operations. Also Changes Made to Reflect that User Flying Rates and Expectations Were Being Exceeded.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3. Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KPM
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Status
</Th>
<th>
Operational Impact of Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
