---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Complex Weapons Pipeline
Page_from: 114.0
Page_to: 133.0
Project_label: Complex Weapons Pipeline
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_114_133.md
---
FALSE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Complex Weapons Pipeline
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Complex Weapons
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore Simon Rochelle (Centre Managed Programmes)
</Td>
<td>
27th April 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects /
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Interim Main Gate 1 Loitering Munitions Spear Capability 2 Block 1 Spear Capability 2 Block 2 Spear Capability 3 Future Local Area Air Defence System Interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System
</Td>
<td>
Post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision

Post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Team Complex Weapons Initiative is Based on Meeting the UK's Enduring Requirement to Have Battle Winning Military Capability Through the Use of Complex Weapons; to be Assured that the Weapons will Perform as Expected; and to Retain the Ability to Develop Leading Edge Complex Weapons Technologies.

Within this Context, the Initiative Aims to Deliver:

1.  Improved, Adaptable and Flexible Complex Weapons that can be Shaped to Meet Current and Future Military Capability Needs;

2.  Freedom of Action and Operational Advantage in Our Complex Weapons Through a Sustained Indigenous Industrial Construct.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Assessment Phase

In April 2008 an Initial Gate Submission Was Made to the Investment Approvals Board (IAB) for the

Complex Weapons Sector. This Was Approved in June 2008. the Business Case Sought Approval to

^enter\ Text\ Here^enter a Non-Competitive Assessment Phase (AP) with Team Complex Weapons. the Assesssment Phase Was Designed to Test the Viability of UK Sovereign Acquisition of Complex Weapons (CW) Through a Modular and Funding Pipeline Approach that Offered Greater Value for Money. This Was Consistent with the Defence Industrial Strategy (DIS) in Maintaining Operational Sovereignty of UK Complex Weapons and Sustaining UK Industry's Specialist Capabilities.

Initial Work Considered a Number of Options, Ranging from Non-Competitive Based Around Team Complex Weapons to Full Open Competition. the Options Were Assessed on their Ability to Meet Military Capability, Operational Sovereignty and Value for Money Measured Against the Draft Concept of Analysis. the Analysis Strongly Indicated that the Continued Use of Competition Would Progressively Erode the MoD's Ability to Secure Affordable and Effective Military Capability and Restrict Future Choice and Decision Making.

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the Team Complex Weapons (TCW) Proposition is Founded on the Defence Industrial Strategy (DIS) that Set Out the UK's Intent to Preserve Operational Sovereignty of Its Complex Weapons. the First Step in Assessing the Viability of a UK Sovereign Acquistion Was a Non Competitive Assessment Phase which Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board (Initial Gate June 2008). This Covered Risk Reduction Work to Develop Solutions to Meet the Future Air to Surface Guided Weapon (FASGW), Loitering Munition; Stormshadow Capability Enhancement Programme (SSCEP); Future Local Area Air Defence System (FLAADS); and Selected Precision Effects at Range (SPEAR) Programmes. Review Note 1 (March 2009) Sought Approval of a Second Tranche of Money to Continue the Assessment Phase and Review Note 2 (November 2009) Sought Approval for Funds to Conclude the Assessment Phase and to Address the Questions Raised by the Investment Approvals Board (July/October 2009). the Assessment Phase Concluded that the Preferred Option Was a Long Term Partnering Model Based on Bilateral Arrangements with the Team Complex Weapons Prime Contractors. with the Strategic Defence Review on the Horizon Interim Main Gate 1 (March 2010) Proposed Entering into a Shorter Term Interim Portfolio Management Agreement (PMA-I) with MBDA UK. It also Sought Approval for Expenditure to Meet Only Immediate Complex Weapons Requirements Specifically:
Loitering Munition (Fireshadow) (Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture);
Selected Precision Effects at Range (SPEAR) Capability 2 Block 1 (Demonstration &amp; Manufacture) (Now Brimstone 2);
Future Local Area Air Defence System (FLAADS) (Assessment Phase);
Spear Capability 2 Block 2 (Now Spiral Development) (Assessment Phase); and Spear Capability 3 (Assessment Phase) Interim Main Gate 2 Was the Second of Three Submissions which Sought Approval for the Demonstration Phase of the Maritime Element of the Future Local Area Air Defence System (Maritime). This Was Approved in Principle by the Investment Approvals Committee in April 2011 and in December 2011 Director General Finance Confirmed that it Was Affordable.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.4. in-Year Progress

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>interim Main Gate 1 Loitering Munition - The Demonstration and Manufacture Phase of Fireshadow Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in April 2010 as Part of the Complex Weapons Interim Main Gate 1 Submission. It is Intended that this will be Demonstrated in 2012. Spear Capability 2 Block 1 (Brimstone 2)
<ol Type="i">
<li>rocket Motor April 2011 - An Issue Identified. June - High Level Issues Resolved. February 2012 Rocket Motor Failed Qualification. Detailed Investigations into Failure Begins</Li>
<li>tandem Firing Performance Trials Undertaken July/August 2011;
Outcome Unsatisfactory. Discussions with Company Ongoing</Li>
<li>warhead Gained Critical Design Review in December 2011</Li>
<li>telemetry Firings in January/February 2012 (using Legacy Rocket Motor). Analysis Ongoing but Indications that Firings Were Successful</Li>
</Ol>
Spear Capability 2 Block 2 Planning Round 2011 Option to Delete and Decision to Continue with Spear Capability 2 Spiral Development. Spear Capability 3
<ol Type="i">
<li>request for Quotations (RFQ) for Seekers Released - February 2011</Li>
<li>initial Discussions About Demonstration and Manufacture/Integration Issues with Typhoon - May 2011 (Iii) Assessment Phase Subsystem Downselect, Concept Design Review and Phase 2 Gate Review Completed - July 2011</Li>
</Ol>
<ol Start="4" Type="i">
<li>mbda Commenced Launcher Study Because BRU-61 Launcher Found to be Incompatible with Chilled Airframe Design - August 2011</Li>
<li>warhead Supplier Recommendation Endorsed by Portfolio Management Board; Systems Design</Li>
</Ol>
Review Complete; BAE Systems under Contract for Phase 1 of Airframe and Propulsion Flight Demonstration. Draft System Requirement Document Issued - December 2011
<ol Start="6" Type="i">
<li>contract Let with Hamilton Sunstrand for Turbojet Technical Assistance Agreement - January 2012</Li>
</Ol>
Interim Main Gate 2 Following Investment Approvals Board Approval in April 2011, Future Local Area Air Defence System (Maritime) (Now Officially Known as Sea Ceptor) Type 23 Demonstration Phase Contract Was Placed in December 2011. MBDA is the Prime Contractor with Supporting Non-Prime Elements Provided by BAE Maritime Services, Qinetiq and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL). the Preliminary Design Review Was Held in February/March 2012 and Its Successful Conclusion Marks a Major Milestone. Interim Main Gate 3 Was the Third of the Submissions and Concerned Approval for the Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. the Business Case Was Presented to Equipment Capability Secretariat on 9 January 2012 and Was Considered by the Investment Approvals Committee on 18 January. on 31 January Director General Finance Approved the Case, with a Caveat that Negotiations Should be Concluded with France Before 31 March 2012. Bi-Laterals Continued, but by 28 March when Chief Secretary to the Treasury(CST) Wrote to the MoD, Discussions Had not Been Concluded and as Such Chief Secretary to the Treasury Approved the Case, Subject to Receiving French National Approval. Reflecting this Caveated Approvals Position and the Absence of a Final Negotiated Position on the Future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) Demonstration and Manufacture Phase, Standard Major Projects Report Practice Has Been Followed Meaning that this Project is not Included in Later Sections of this Report.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.5. Capability Risks

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>interim Main Gate 1 Selective Precision Effects at Range Capability 2 Block 1 (Spear Capability 2 Block 1) - Brimstone 2 - Replaces the Legacy Brimstone Missile's Energetics and Airframe with a New Insensitive Munitions (IM) Compliant Warhead, Rocket Motor and an Upgraded Seeker and Airframe. Spear Cap 2 Block 1 will Replace the Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone (DMSB) Capability Currently in Service with the Royal Air Force (RAF) and will be Integrated Onto Tornado GR4 and is Intended for Integration on Typhoon. Spear Capability 3 is a New 100kg Class Weapon. This Capability will be the Primary Air-to-Ground Armament for the Joint Combat Aircraft (JCA)/F-35b Joint Strike Fighter from , and Optimised for Internal Carriage. Spear Capability 3 will Provide the Means to Destroy/Defeat a Wide Range of Targets at Range, Including Mobile and Re-Locatable Targets, in all Weathers Day and Night, in Complex Environments under Tight Rules of Engagements (ROE). the Indirect Fire Precision Attack (IFPA) Programme will Address the Requirement to Attack Static and Moving Targets at Various Ranges. Within This, Loitering Munitions will Focus on the Most Complex Targets where Man-in-the-Loop Capability is Required in Order to Ensure Mission Success and Minimise the Potential for Collateral Damage. Interim Main Gate 2 the Future Local Area Air Defence System (FLAADS) Implementation will Provide Increased Capability over Sea Wolf that Addresses the Capability Shortfall Identified in the 2009 Capability Above Water Capability Audits. the Future Local Area Air Defence System Solution is the Only Candidate to Fill the Capability Gap that is both Affordable and will Meet the Key User Requirements (KURs) Within the Required Timescales.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>tornado GR4</Td>
<td>brimstone 2 - Missile in Service Date - To be Confirmed</Td>
<td>in Service</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme 2</Td>
<td>brimstone 2 - Typhoon Upgrade Programme – Missile in Service Date - To be Confirmed</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>joint Combat Aircraft</Td>
<td>spear Cap 3 - Expected Prior to Joint Combat Aircraft Present Assumed Service Entry</Td>
<td>post Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>apache Helicopter</Td>
<td>spear Cap 2 Block 2 - </Td>
<td>concept Phase</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 2</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 3</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>loitering Munitions</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>
Demonstration and

Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 1</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to

Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2-
Future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to

Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Current Support Approach is Through Individual Contracts for Each Weapon Type, E.g. Stormshadow, ASRAAM, Etc. the Intent in Interim Main Gate 1 Was to Secure a Long Term Arrangement for in Service Support (ISS) under the Unified Support Environment (USE) with MBDA. the USE Strategy Has Since Been Revised with the Transfer of the Explosives Business Stream of Joint Support Chain Services into Defence Equipment and Support (DE&amp;S) Weapons Operating Centre (WOC) and will be Taken Forward under the Wider Transformation Activity Required to Deliver Efficiencies into this Business. the Most Recent Contract with MBDA (April 2011) for the Sea Viper in Service Support Arrangement will Provide the Benefits Afforded by the Portfolio Management Agreement (Interim) Including Gainshare, and Has the Potential to Act as a Catalyst for ISS Transformation in the Longer Term.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>unified Support Environment</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK Ltd
</Td>
<td>
Manufacture to in Service
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -
UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>complex Weapons Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>239</Td>
<td>236</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>31%</Td>
<td>30%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 1 Assessment Phase Elements</Td>
<td>145</Td>
<td>143</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>60%</Td>
<td>59%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>384</Td>
<td>379</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>49%</Td>
<td>48%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 1 Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Elements</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">
-
</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">
246
</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Loitering Munitions
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Spear Capability 2 Block 1
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
541
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 1</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">246</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">243</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">-3</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Loitering Munitions
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Spear Capability 2 Block 1
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td>541</Td>
<td>540</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>787</Td>
<td>783</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Interim Main Gate 1

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>capability Trading</Td>
<td>loitering Munition and Spear Capability 2 Block 1 are both in the Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture Phase and Have a Combined Approval of £196m (£96m<sup>1</Sup> + £100m). Spend on These Two Projects Totals £243m Giving a Variance of +£47m. This Would Suggest that the Interim Main Gate 1 Approval Has Been Breached, However, in February 2009, Prior to the Complex Weapons Pipeline Approval, Team Complex Weapons Received Approval for Brimstone Insensitive Munition - £67m. the Project Spent £17m on Brimstone Insensitive Munition and Transferred the Remainder (£50m) to Spear Capability 2 Block 1, to Form Part of the Pipeline Funding. When this Additional Approval is Added to that in Interim Main Gate 1 (£196m) the Combined Approval is £246m. This Gives Overall Approvals Headroom of Circa £3m.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
REF!
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.2 Interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation

Pp
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>interim Main Gate 2, £483m is Committed via a Firm Price Contract with MBDA. the Remaining £58m is for Non-Prime Activities, that is Contracts Let with Companies Other than MBDA. These Contracts will be Raised over the Remaining Period of the Project and will not Necessarily be Firm Price Agreements. as Such These

Costs are Subject to Change and

The Project’s Current Forecast is that There will be a Slight Underspend Against Approval of £1m.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase B.5 Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>268</Td>
<td>39</Td>
<td>307</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>156</Td>
<td>238</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>350</Td>
<td>195</Td>
<td>545</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1

The Major Projects Report States that the Department Has Spent £207 Million on Loitering Munition. This is Made Up of £107 Million Spent Against the Approval of £96 Million, which Was Noted in Interim Main Gate 1, and £100 Million Spent on Assessment Phase Activities.

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>complex Weapons</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td>22</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast/

Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted For</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast/

Approved</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>loitering Munitions</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 1</Td>
<td>july 2012</Td>
<td>october 2012</Td>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td>july 2016</Td>
<td>
November 2016
</Td>
<td>may 2018</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>loitering Munitions</Td>
<td>original Definition: The Project will Deliver 25 Safe and Useful Munitions in March 2012 (50%). These will Form a Start-Up Capability for Current Operations. MPR 2012 Definition: These Definitions are not Applicable yet Given the Incremental Acquisition Approach. in Service Date and Initial Operating Capability Would Likely Occur in Later Increments and be Subject to Definition and Approvals at an Appropriate Time. However, an Initial Batch of Weapons Systems Was Delivered, on Time, in March 2012. These Were Demonstrated in June 2012 and While the Success Rate Was Lower than Desired, Performance of the Hardware Met the Loitering Munition Key Performance Measures. Reason for Change: The Senior Responsible Owner Took a Decision not to Deploy the Weapon for Testing in Afghanistan as the Capability Was not Sufficiently Mature. It Could Therefore not Meet Its in-Service Date for Use in Afghanistan so it Has Been Re-Defined.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 1</Td>
<td>200 Missiles and Six Aircraft Modified to Operate Them</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td>in Service Date is the Date on which There is Sufficient Evidence Across all Defence Lines of Development (DLODS) to Allow the Front Line Command to Take Control of the System. More Specifically, in Service Date is Achieved with Successful Completion of Acceptance Activities which Includes Completion of the First Type 23 Platform Integration and Trials, Including Firings. for Future Local Area Air Defence System Initial Operating Capability will Coincide with the in Service Date.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>loitering Munitions</Td>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>in-Service Date Was not Met</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 1</Td>
<td>october 2012</Td>
<td>february 2015</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td>
November 2016
</Td>
<td>
November 2016
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Loitering Munitions

### C.3.3.2 Spear Capability 2 Block 1

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical Issues with Warhead and Rocket Motor; Reported in Interim Main Gate 2.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>further Technical Issues with the Warhead and Significant Technical Issues with Roxel Manufactured Rocket Motor. a Minor Performance Concession Has Been Agreed to Assist in Resolving the Technical Issue with the Rocket Motor.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.3 Interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System

## C.3.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 1</Td>
<td>to Avoid an Unacceptable Operational Impact Arising from the in Service Date Variation it is Planned to Deliver an IOC that will Provide a Fully Functional Spear Capability 2 Capability Utilising Current Spear Capability 1 Rocket Motor and Warhead (Non-Insensitive Munition (IM) Standard) Followed by a Full Operating Capability when the IM Rocket Motor Issues Have Been Resolved.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>loitering Munitions</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability Requirement under Revision as Part of Wider Indirect Fire Precision Attack Programme.</Td>
<td>the Incremental Approach Has Delivered an End- To- End Capability

Demonstration which Was Successful in Yielding Information and

Understanding that will be Used to

Inform Departmental Planning on the

Way Forward- Not Just in Relation to Loitering Munition, but the Whole

Indirect Fire Precision Attack Project.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 1</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability is Defined As: Full Stockpile on Spear Capability 2

Block 1 Delivered, all Platforms Modified to Utilise Its Full Capability,

Sufficient Trained Air and Ground Crews, Full in-Service Support Solution in Place.</Td>
<td>
Warhead Lethality Requirement Achieved and Critical Design Review Passed; Three Development Firings

Completed Successfully with Brimstone 2 Seeker and Software.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2- Future Local Area Air Defence System</Td>
<td>as for Initial Operating Capability but with all Remaining Type 23 Frigates (X12) Fitted and a Full Missile Stockpile ( Total Warshot Incl Initial ) Delivered.</Td>
<td><ol Type="i">
<li>acheivement of Demonstration</Li>
</Ol>
Phase Contract Award to Deliver First of Class Platform - December 2011.
<ol Start="2" Type="i">
<li>successful Completion of The</Li>
</Ol>
System Preliminary Design Review - March 2012.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>last Years Score</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="4"></Td>
<td>loitering Munition</Td>
<td>84 GREEN</Td>
<td>84 GREEN</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 1</Td>
<td>58 RED</Td>
<td>
67 AMBER
</Td>
<td>
The Movement from Amber to Red is the Result of a Major Slip Caused by Technical Problems which will Lead to Replanning of Milestones and Possible Financial Implications.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Block 2</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>
Increment Has Been Cancelled
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>interim Main Gate 2 Future Local Area Air Defence System (Maritime)(M)</Td>
<td>84 GREEN</Td>
<td>
88 GREEN
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

## D.2.1 Loitering Munitions

Fire Shadow Block 1b is Undergoing Pan-DLOD Acceptance with the Sponsor (First Part Due for Completion in Apr 2012) and the Focus is Now on the Support to the Lead Up to a User-Led Capability Demonstration in June 2012.

### D.2.1.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>
Not Met / Forecast not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="10"></Td>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>equipment Has Been Delivered.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>troop Have Been Trained.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>logistics Requirements Have Been Met, Commensurate with Equipment Delivery</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>facilities (Inc Training Classroom) Commissioned at Albermarle Barracks</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>fire Shadow Troop Formed.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>conops (Concept of Operations) Issued.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>troop Formed for Current Phase. Future Org Plans TBC.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>requirements Have Been Met, Commensurate with Equipment Delivery</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.1 Defence Line of Development Variation

## D.2.2 Spear Capability 2 Block 1

### D.2.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 0%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 0%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 0%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 0%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 0%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">line of Development</Th>
<th Colspan="2">description</Th>
<th Colspan="2">met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Not Met / Forecast not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2" Rowspan="3"></Td>
<td Colspan="2">1. Equipment</Td>
<td Colspan="2">spiral Development of Dual Mode Brimstone. Insentive Munition Development</Td>
<td Colspan="2">yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">2. Training</Td>
<td Colspan="2">training Provided for in-Service Users</Td>
<td Colspan="2">yes</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">3. Logistics</Td>
<td Colspan="2">support Provided for in-Service Use</Td>
<td Colspan="2">yes</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Infrastructure Sufficient to Support Stockpile at Readiness.
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Yes
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">5. Personnel</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Yes
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">6. Doctrine</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Principles for Capability Employment
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Yes
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">7. Organisation</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
No Change to Organisation Required.
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Yes
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">8. Information</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Data Handling and Transmission Sufficient.
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Yes
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
8 (1)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
N/a
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
N/a
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>defence Line of Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>significant Technical Difficulties Experienced with Rocket Motor and Warhead Development are Being Managed to Minimise the Impact on Cost, Time and Capability Performance.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.3 Spear Capability 2 Block 2

N/A: Spear Capability 2 Block 2 Cancelled - Capability Assumed to be Absorbed by Capability 2 Block 1 Technical

Insertion (Planned Assumption for Service Entry 2024) and Capability 2 Block 3 (Planned Assumption for Service Entry 2022)

## D.2.4 Interim Main Gate 2 - Future Local Area Air Defence System Demonstration & Manufacture

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence Lines of Development
</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>
Not Met / Forecast not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>cps 226</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>man in the Loop Operation</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.4.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>
Not Met / Forecast not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="10"></Td>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>delivery, Installation and Acceptance of First of Class System</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>delivery of Operator Training Solution Through Maritime Composite Training System and Maintainer Training Through Computer Based Training Solution.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>industrial in-Service Support Solution in Place</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>defence Munitions Processing Capability in Place.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>principles for Capability Employment</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>organisation in Place to Exploit Capability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>information Interfaces Defined, Proven And</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.4.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

## D.3. Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Loitering Munitions

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
CPS 273
</Th>
<th>all</Th>
<th>
Range from Control Node
</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 279
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Prosecution of Target
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 285
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Operate in Climatic Zones
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 431
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Control Node Transportable in Transit Cases
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 361
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Capable of Operating in Daylight
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 416
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Prosecution of Target
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 278
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Endurance Including Transit
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 432
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Each Control Node Package be a Maximum Man Lift
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 362
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Capable of Operating During Darkness
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 346
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Image of Sufficient Quality at
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 546
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Responsiveness at Range
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 547
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Responsiveness at Range
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 536
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Control Node Communications in all Azimuths
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 390
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Engagement per Control Node
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 289
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Specified Munition Altitude Ceiling
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 388
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Launchers per Hour, per Node
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 385
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Control Node into Action less than  Hours
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 433
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Control Node Operated from
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 543
</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Moving Target- Prosecution of Target
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 415
</Td>
<td>
LOGISTICS
</Td>
<td>
No Need for Dedicated Handling or Loading Equipment
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 230
</Td>
<td>
LOGISTICS
</Td>
<td>
Control Node Transportable Internally by CH47
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 425
</Td>
<td>
LOGISTICS
</Td>
<td>
Launch Node Transportable Internally by CH47
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 434
</Td>
<td>
LOGISTICS
</Td>
<td>
Munitions Transportable Internally by CH47
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>24 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Key Performance Measure
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
CPS 285
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical Evidence (Trials Reports) Awaited in Relation to the Qualification of the Boost Motor. the Extra Information Was Required to Complete the Compliance Position for Operating in Specified Climatic Zones (CPS 285) and Being Transported by Helicopter (CPS 434).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
CPS 434
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical Evidence (Trials Reports) Awaited in Relation to the Qualification of the Boost Motor. the Extra Information Was Required to Complete the Compliance Position for Operating in Specified Climatic Zones (CPS 285) and Being Transported by Helicopter (CPS 434).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.3.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.3.2 Spear Capability 2 Block 1

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence Lines of Development
</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>
Not Met / Forecast not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="11"></Td>
<td>kur1, UR 1.1</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Requires a Capability that is Effective Against the Specified Target Set at the Stipulated Max Range.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur2, UR 1.4</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Requires a Weapon that can Achieve a Lethal Effect Against a Wide Variety of Target Types.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur3, UR 1.7</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Complex Scenarios with a High Degree of Confidence that Only the Intended Targets will be Engaged.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur4, UR 1.9</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring Targets.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur5, UR 1.14</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Environments where Collateral Damage Issues Exist</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur7, UR 1.16</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>the User Requires that Data be Provided to Dstl to Enable the Theatre Command Structure to Complete Collateral Damage Assessment as Part of the Target Clearance Process for Pre-Planned Missions.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur10, UR 1.46</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Requires a Capability that Allows an Engagement to be Aborted after Launch</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 11, UR 2.1</Td>
<td>operational and Logistical</Td>
<td>the User Required the Allup-Round to be Compliant with the External Profile, Mass and Centre of Gravity (Including Tolerances) for the Specified in Service Weapon Warhead</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 12, UR 3.27</Td>
<td>operational and Logistical</Td>
<td>the User Requires that the Warhead be Compatible with the Inservice Components and Equipment Associated with Legacy Weapons as Stated.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.3.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Key Performance Measure
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
16/04/2012
</Td>
<td>
KUR4, UR 1.9; the

User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td>project yet to Complete (Seeker Handover) Trials Activities to Generate Assurance Information. the UOR Weapon Configuration on which Brimstone 2 is Based Was not Formally Assessed under Trials Conditions Due</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Targets to the Rapid Timescales

## D.3.3 Spear Capability 2 Block 2- Cancelled

## D.3.4 Interim Main Gate 2 - Future Local Area Air Defence System D&M

### D.3.4.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence Lines of Development
</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>
Not Met / Forecast not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="12"></Td>
<td>kur 1</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Air Threats Targeting the Host Platform.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 2</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Air Threats Targeting the Defended Asset.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Stand-Off Air Threat.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Control the Engagement.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Utilise in Environmental Conditions.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>the User Shall Integrate to the Host Platform.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 7</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>the Communication and Information System Interoperability Elements of the Solution to this User Requirement Document Shall be Acquired in Accordance with MOD Communication and Information System Policy.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 8</Td>
<td>
Personnel Organisation
</Td>
<td>the User Shall Utilise with Available Manning.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 9</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Trained to Utilise</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 10</Td>
<td>logistics Equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall Complete Missions without Critical Failure</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.4.2 Key Performance Measures Variation
