---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate
Project: FUTURE LYNX
Page_from: 61.0
Page_to: 68.0
Project_label: Future Rapid Effects System
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_61_68.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE LYNX

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

LYNX

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Air and Littoral Manoeuvre) –
Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Requirement

Director Equipment Capability (Above Water Effects) – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Requirement

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the PROJECT

## 1a. Project Description, Progress and Key Future Events

The Future Lynx Capability Was Developed to Meet the Requirement for a Dedicated Small Helicopter for Use in both the Land and Maritime Environments. Future Lynx is a Single-Source, Combined Helicopter Procurement Programme with Westland Helicopters Ltd which Follows More Effective Contracting Principles. Project Approval is for 80 Aircraft, with Funding for 70 Held by the Integrated Project Team, and Funding for a Further 10 Held by the Helicopter Strategy Team. the Demonstration &
Manufacture Contract Was Let in June 2006 to Deliver 70 Aircraft: 40

Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters for the Army and 30 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft for the Navy to Replace the Current Lynx Fleet which is Reaching Its Life End. the Contract also Includes Costed Options for Five more Platforms of Each Type. Preliminary and Interim Critical Design Reviews Have Been Successfully Achieved in January and October 2007 Respectively, and Machining of Airframe Parts Commenced in October 2007. Significant Future Milestones Are: Air Vehicle Critical Design Review in April 2008, Interim Phase Review in November 2008 and First Flight in November 2009. Through-Life Training & Support Solutions are to be Developed as Part of the Project. an Information Note Was Approved in July 2007 to Submit the Support Solution Review Note in September 2009. Approval Was Given for the Training Service Initial Gate Business Case in August 2007 which is Based on the 4-Stage PFI Treasury Approval Process.

The Project Has Two ISDs as it is Delivering Two Different Capabilities. the First ISD is for the

Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter and is Reported in Section 3. the Current Forecast ISD for Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft is January 2015. This is Defined as One Deployable Aircraft with Logistic Support, Trained Aircrew and Groundcrew in Place.

## 1b. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">critical to Achievement of ISD</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 1c. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>contractor(s)</Th>
<th>contract Scope</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>westland Helicopters Ltd, Yeovil</Td>
<td>demonstration to Manufacture</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee with a Maximum Price</Td>
<td>non-Competitive</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance Against Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
1911
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
1966
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-55
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
+2
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Reasons for Variation from Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>increased Cost of Capital Due to Increased Year End Outturn Ahead of Schedule.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>increase in Cost of Capital Due to Reprofiling of Lifetime Expenditure, Delivery Schedule, Updated Accrual Model and Subsequent Capitalisation of RDEL Costs Approved at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-65</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) Figure and Highest Acceptable (not to Exceed) Estimates at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-55</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</Th>
<th>
181
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of Peak Procurement Expenditure</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2010/2011
</Td>
<td>
2011/2012
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2e. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">unit Production Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">quantities Required</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>current</Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>current</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>13.7</Td>
<td>13.4</Td>
<td>35 Surface Combatant Maritime Reconnaissance</Td>
<td>35 Surface Combatant Maritime Reconnaissance</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>12.7</Td>
<td>12.4</Td>
<td>45 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>45 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>46.8</Td>
<td>47.0</Td>
<td>
2 Training Simulators
</Td>
<td>
2 Training Simulators
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 78%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>isd Definition:</Th>
<th>
ISD for Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter is Defined as 4 Force Elements at Readiness to Deploy on a Small Scale Focussed Intervention Operation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3b. Performance Against Approved in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast ISD</Td>
<td>
January 2014
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
August 2014
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation (Months)</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3c. Reasons for Variation from Approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
August 2007
</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>procurement Strategy</Td>
<td>flight Simulation and Synthetic Trainers Integrated Project Team Future Lynx Training Services Initial Gate Business Case Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in August 2007. the Required Mitigation Activity Has Been Completed and Has Brought the Training Service ISD in Line with the ISD and the Three Months Recovered.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+3
</Td>
<td>procurement Strategy</Td>
<td>since Main Gate, Project Advised that the New Treasury 4 Gate Approval Process for Candidate PFI Projects Needed to be Adopted. This Process Had the Potential to Add One Year to the Procurement Timescale for the Synthetic Training Service. Sufficiently Trained Aircrew are Required Before ISD can be Declared and it Was Considered Prudent to Declare an ISD Slip of 3 Months While Mitigation Work Matured.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) Figure and Highest Acceptable (not to Exceed) Estimates at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3d. Cost Resulting from ISD Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>type of Cost/Saving</Th>
<th>
Cost £m
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>saving £m</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
## 3e. Operational Impact of ISD Variation
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance Against Approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>forecast to be

Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters
</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 01
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Manned Rotorcraft Capable of Independent and Co-Operative, Intelligent Action, which Provides Commanders with a Sustainable, Timely, Responsive and Accurate, Enduring Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability at Long Range Across the Full Spectrum of Conflict.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 02
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Capability to Acquire, Designate Targets and Direct the Full Spectrum of Joint Fires via Network Enabled Communications.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 03
</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level of Operational Effect.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 04
</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Deliver Operational Capability with a High Likelihood of Survival.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 05
</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interoperate with Relevant Military and Civil Authorities
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 06
</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Have a Capability that can Operate Within Defined Natural and Man-Made Environmental Conditions.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 07
</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate from both Land and Sea Bases to Target Areas on Land or Sea.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 08
</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Deployed Worldwide
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft
</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 01
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Manned Rotorcraft Capable of Independent and Co-Operative, Intelligent Action, which Provides Commanders with a Sustainable, Timely, Responsive and Accurate, Enduring Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability at Long Range Across the Full Spectrum of Conflict.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur Serial</Td>
<td>
Key Requirement
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>
Not to be Met
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 02</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Capability to Acquire, Designate Targets and Direct the Full Spectrum of Joint Fires via Network Enabled Communications.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 03</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Autonomously and Cooperatively Attack using Appropriate Rapid and Flexible Fires with the Joint Battlespace.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 04</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Vertical Lift Capability to Deploy and Support Joint Forces, as Operationally Effective Units, from Land or Sea Bases.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 05</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level of Operational Effect.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 06</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Deliver Operational Capability with a High Likelihood of Survival.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 07</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interoperate with Relevant Military and Civilian Authorities
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 08</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Have a Capability that can Operate Within Defined Natural and Man-Made Environmental Conditions
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 09</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate from both Land and Sea Bases to Target Areas on Land or Sea.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 10</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Deployed Worldwide
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
100%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">in-Year Change</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 4b. Reasons for Variation Against Approved Key Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
February 2008
</Td>
<td>
Surface Combatant Maritime

Reconnaissance KUR 01</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>one of the Ten Elements of this KUR is Considered to be at Risk. the Contracted Position, with Respect to the Installed Radar Detection Performance, Does not Meet the KUR. Work is Ongoing Between the Integrated Project Team and Agusta Westland to Evaluate the Extent of the Shortfall.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP to MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Initial Gate Approval Was Given in December 2001 for the Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter and in September 2002 for the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft. Following Review under the Future Rotorcraft Programme the Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter Requirement Matured into the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Requirement.

Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter:

The Assessment Phase Benchmarked Westland Helicopter Ltd’s Future Lynx Proposal Against Alternative Off-the-Shelf Solutions from Other Potential Suppliers, and Required the Company to Demonstrate the Necessary Level of Performance to Successfully Deliver the Demonstration & Manufacture Phase.

Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft:

A Single Tender Contract Was Placed with Westland Helicopter Ltd to Develop and De-Risk their Future Lynx Proposal to Meet the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Requirement in Conjunction with the Approved Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter Programme.

Procurement Strategy:

Two Procurement Strategies Were Considered. the First Was to Run a Competition and Second, to Pursue the Westland Helicopter Future Lynx Proposal on a Single Tender Basis - With an Option to Switch from Single Tender to Competition Should the Assessment Phase Indicate that the Future Lynx Solution Was Unlikely to be Cost Effective. the Second Strategy Was the Selected One.

The Result of the Assessment Phase Considered the Future Lynx to be the Most Likely of the Options to Deliver the Required Capability by the ISD. This Gave the Benefit of Maintaining Industrial Capability in the UK. Hence a Single Tender Approach Was Judged Most Likely to Offer both the Best Technical Solution and Best Value for Money Overall.

The Assessment Phase Successfully De-Risked a Number of Key Requirements, Including Secure Communications, Mission Systems and Engine Certification. Furthermore, Westland Helicopter Ltd’s Super Lynx 300 Export Programme Demonstrated their Capability to Insert New T-800 Engines, Glass Cockpit and Avionics into the Lynx Aircraft.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (Outturn Prices)       | Assessment Phase Cost | Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement Expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 57                        | 2.9%                                                      |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 59                        | 2.9%                                                      |
| Variation                     | -2                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
</Colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>date of Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
June 2006
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date of Initial Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
December 2001
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>length of Assessment Phase [months]</Td>
<td>
54
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5d. Cost Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (Outturn Prices)</Th>
<th>lowest</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>highest</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Forecast at Main Gate</Td>
<td>1760</Td>
<td>1901</Td>
<td>1966</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>expected Envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>1308</Td>
<td>1351</Td>
<td>1637</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5e. ISD Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>earliest</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>latest Acceptable</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>may 2013</Td>
<td>
January 2014
</Td>
<td>
August 2014
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability Was Expected to be Available at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>september 2006</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
