---
Year: 2007.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate
Project: NIMROD MRA4
Page_from: 101.0
Page_to: 110.0
Project_label: Nimrod MRA4
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2007_101_110.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

NIMROD MRA4

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

NIMROD MRA4

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability: Director Equipment Capability (Under Water Effect)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project Description, Progress and Key Future Events

The Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 (MRA4) will Replace the Current Nimrod MR2 as the New Maritime Patrol Aircraft. MRA4 will Provide Significantly Enhanced Anti-Submarine and Anti-Surface Warfare Capability Through Improved Aircraft and Sensor Performance, a Greater Degree of System Integration, Better Human Machine Interface Design and a Substantial Improvement in Availability and Supportability.

The MRA4 Contract for the Design, Development and Production of 21 Aircraft Was Placed with BAE Systems (then BAe) in 1996, Following an International Competition. the Contract Was Re-Negotiated in Mid 1999 and Again in Early 2002 – when the Department Reduced the Number of Aircraft from 21 to 18. Continued Technical and Resource Problems Led to a Further Review of the Programme and in February 2003 the Department Reached an Agreement with BAE Systems to Change the Fixed Price Contract to a Target Cost Incentive Fee (TCIF) Contract for Design and Development, which Included Manufacture of Three Trials Aircraft, and an Option for a Further Fifteen Production Aircraft. Pending Definition of a Satisfactory Design Standard, Series Production Activities Were Limited to Those Activities Vital to the Preservation of the Essential Skill Sets Within BAE Systems and Its Supply Chain. Flight Trials are Underway with all Three Aircraft.

In July 2004, Studies Determined that the Capability of the MRA4 Would Enable Maritime Reconnaissance Requirement to be Met with a Fleet of About 12 Aircraft and the Number to be Procured Has Been Reduced Accordingly. a Further Review of the Programme Identified Increased Production Costs and that the in-Service Date for the Capability Would Need to be Delayed in Order to Make the Programme Affordable Within Departmental Funding Constraints. a Business Case Seeking Authorisation of Commitment to Full Production Was Approved in May 2006, and the Contract Was Amended to Re-Introduce the Production Requirements in July 2006. as Part of the Approval Process the Project’s Original Key Requirements Were Redefined and Endorsed as Key User Requirements by the Investment Approval Board (IAB) and a Revised Definition of the in-Service Date Was Approved. the Initial Gate Business Case for the Assessment Phase of Future Support Was Approved in May 2005 with Main Gate Submission Expected Around the End of 2007.

## 1b. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">critical to Achievement of ISD</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>forecast ISD</Td>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 1c. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>contractor(s)</Th>
<th>contract Scope</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bae Systems, Warton</Td>
<td>design and Development</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref"
Id="Fnref1" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A></Td>
<td>prime Contractor International Competition</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>bae Systems, Warton</Td>
<td>production</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee<sup></Sup></Td>
<td>prime Contractor</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">originally Let as a Fixed Price Contract.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance Against Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
3500
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
2813
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+687
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
-16
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Reasons for Variation from Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
November 2006
</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>interest on Capital Recalculated Based Upon Equipment Plan (EP) 07 Profile and Reduction in Management Reserve.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
November 2006
</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td>
Accounting

Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>woodford under-Recovery of Overhead Double Counted in EP07 as Already Included in Company Cost Forecast.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
June 2006
</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>review of EP07 Estimates &amp; Schedule as a Result of Risk Realisation Stability Augmentation System/Stall Identification Device (SAS/SID) Has Led to Increased Coherence in the Programme Resulting in a Lower Requirement for Management Reserve.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-80
</Td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</Td>
<td>reduction from 18 Aircraft to 12 (-£155m) and Associated Reduction in Cost of Capital Charge (COCC) (-£10m). Reduction from 21 to 18 Aircraft; MPR02 Saving of £114m less Estimated Termination Costs Of</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>£70m; MPR03 Further Savings Identified in 2003 Planning Process (-£16m). Additional Commitments as Part of the Heads of Agreement (+£35m). Additional Costs for Assessment of Enhanced Capability as Part of the Agreement Announced on 19 February 2003 (+£10m). as a Consequence of the Agreement, QinetiQ Requirement Extended (+£40m). Reduction in Cost of Assessment of Enhanced Capability (-£5m). Contract Change Requirements (+£70m). Reduction in Government Furnished Equipment Requirement (-£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-27</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>reduction in Risk Provision (MPR00 -£17m; MPR02 -£17m). Contractor Forecast Was Greater than Advised in MPR05 Resulting in Increased COCC (+£7m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+41</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>variation in Inflation Assumptions (+£41m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>receipts</Td>
<td>forecast Recovery of Liquidated Damages (-£46m) less Those to be Foregone as Part of the Agreement Announced on 19 February 2003 (+£39m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+24</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>reduction in Risk Provision (-56m); and Reductions Following the Renegotiation of Contract (-£26m); Reduction in Programme Costs Between Main Gate Approval and Original Contract Placement (-£37m); Original Contract Was Let at Provisional Indices that Were Below Actual Indices (+£16m). Additional Costs Relating to the Agreement Announced on 19 February 2003 for Design and Development Target Cost Fee (+£132m). Increased Cost in Light of Company Contract Quality Price for Production and Associated Analysis of Revised Costing for October 2005 Investment Approvals Board Review Note (+£70m). Overhead Recoveries (+£14m), Initial Logistics Support (+£8m), VAT Liability on Design &amp;
Development Support (+£5m), Increase to Management Reserve Identified in the Departmental Review (+£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>departmental Review – Identified Savings from a Reclassification of Overheads (-£11m), Reduction of Contractor Fee and Production Costs (-£10m), Provision for Reduced Spares (-£13m), VAT Exemption (-£33m), Reductions for Initial Logistics Support (ILS) (-£8m), Reduced Manpower Requirements (-£22m), Cancellation of Spares (-£3m), and Reduced COCC (-£7m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-363</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Redefinitions</Td>
<td>an Adjustment of the Historic Calculation of the COCC (-£32m). Increase in Costs Owing to the Creation of a Trading Fund for the Communications Electronic Security Group (CESG) after Original Approval Had Been Granted (+£1m); Derivation of the Approved Cost on a Resource Basis (-£19m). Change to Take Account of an Adjustment to the Current Forecast for MPR01, Reflecting the Availability of more Accurate Data (+£29m). Changes Caused by the Conversion of Internal Accounting System to Full Resource Basis (-£26m). Difference in Variation Due to Revision of COCC (-£22m). Departmental Review - Identified Savings with a Reclassification of Termination Spares Expenditure (-£176m) and Resulting Reduction in Cost of Capital Charge (COCC) (-£35m). Departmental Review Identified Savings from Reduced COCC from Early Delivery to the Customer (-£69m). Departmental Review – Identified Savings from Reclassification of Adaptable Aircraft Costs (-£4m) and Reclassification of Consumable Stock (-£7m). MPR05 Transposition Error (-£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>+1,115</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increased Production Cost (+£229m) and Increased Cost of Capital Charge (COCC) Linked to Cost Change and Delay in Delivery Programme (+£183m). Increase in Defence Evaluation and Research Agency Estimate (+£13m). Reduction in the Study Requirements (-£6m); Slower</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Date
</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Factor
</Td>
<td>
Explanation
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>technical Progress than Originally Envisaged, Particularly with Wing Mass, Leading to Reduced COCC (+£9m). Reduced COCC Linked to Reduction in Aircraft Numbers (-£2m); Additional Costs Relating to the Agreement of February 2003 (+£359m). Increased Programme Costs (+£348m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</Td>
<td>
+687
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</Th>
<th>
2,742
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of Peak Procurement Expenditure</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2002/2003
</Td>
<td>
2004/2005
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2e. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">unit Production Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>current</Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Current
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>development and Production Package</Td>
<td>development and Production Package</Td>
<td>21</Td>
<td>
12
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 78%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>isd Definition:</Th>
<th>
Original ISD Definition: Delivery of 7th Production Standard Aircraft to Royal Air Force. MPR04 Definition: (Part of the 19th February 2003 Agreement with the Company): Delivery of the Sixth Production Standard Aircraft to the Royal Air Force. Reason for Change: To Reflect the Reduction in the Fleet from 21 to 18 Agreed in 2002; Six Aircraft Represents One Squadron. MPR07 Definition: Provision of 5 Aircraft (4 Deployable) and 6 Combat Ready Crews. Reason for Change: Secretary of State Announced in July 2004, Post MediumTerm Work Strand Studies, a Reduction in the Number of Nimrod MRA4 Aircraft to be Procured from 18 to About 12.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3b. Performance Against Approved in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast ISD</Td>
<td>
September 2010
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
April 2003
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation (Months)</Td>
<td>
+89
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3c. Reasons for Variation from Approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+89
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>to Make Overall Programme Affordable Within Departmental Funding Constraints (MPR05 +12 Months). Resource and Technical Factors at BAE Systems Leading to Programme Slippage: MPR00 +23 Months MPR02 +11 Months MPR03 +40 Months MPR04 +6 Months Difference Between Forecast Date Reported in MPR99 Based on 1999 Re-Approval at 90% Confidence and Forecast Date Reported in MPR00 Based on the Current Plan at 50% Confidence (-3 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</Td>
<td>
+89
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3d. Cost Resulting from ISD Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>type of Cost/Saving</Th>
<th>cost £m</Th>
<th>saving £m</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>support Costs of Current Equipment</Td>
<td>344</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
Additional Costs of Running on Nimrod MR2
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>other</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>150</Td>
<td>
Reduction in MRA4 Support Costs in Same Period
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>+194</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3e. Operational Impact of ISD Variation

The Consequence of the Nimrod MRA4 ISD Slip is that Either the Nimrod MR2 Would Remain in Service Beyond the Current Out-of-Service Date of March 2011 or a Capability Gap will be Endured. This Slip will Delay Introduction of the Improved Capability of the Nimrod MRA4 and Could Require the Ageing Nimrod MR2 Fleet to be Maintained in Service Longer than Expected. the Operational Impact of this Slippage will be Partly Mitigated by Measures Already in Hand to Introduce Upgrades to some Nimrod MR2 Systems. Notably the Acoustic Suite (AQS 971), Navigation Systems, Data Links and Other Communications will Address Interoperability Issues. the AQS 971 Programme Has Benefited by Making Use of Acoustic Processors Procured for Nimrod MRA4 AQS 970 Programme.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

Nimrod MRA4 is a Legacy Project and Its Original Approval Did not Include Key Requirements (KRs).

The KRs Reported to Date in the Major Project Report Were Retrospectively Agreed Between DEC (UWE) and Nimrod IPTL. Before Endorsement Was Sought, it Was Discovered that These KRs Were not Compliant with the Latest Smart Acquisition Guidelines. Consequently, New Key User

Requirements (KUR) Were Developed from First Principles to Comply with the Latest Guidelines and Endorsed by the IAB in June 2006.

## 4a. Performance Against Approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>forecast to be

Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>maritime Counter Terrorism</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</Td>
<td>search &amp; Detect (UWE)</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</Td>
<td>submarine Attack</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</Td>
<td>search &amp; Detect (AWE)</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</Td>
<td>tactical Interoperability</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</Td>
<td>mission Completion</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td>maritime Presence</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</Td>
<td>operations in Hostile Environment</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</Td>
<td>environmental Operating Conditions</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">100 %</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 4b. Reasons for Variation Against Approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 31%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2007
</Td>
<td>
KUR 08
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical and Financial Issues Now Resolved Surrounding Procurement of Electronic Warfare Rig Thereby Allowing Aircraft to Operate with a Selfdefence Capability. Business Case with Investment Appraisal under Compilation. Procurement Schedule Being Determined; Anticipate KUR Compliance when Schedule and Risks Clearly Identified.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

In November 1992, the Equipment Approvals Committee Approved a Request for Information Exercise Whereby 17 Companies Were Invited to Provide Responses to the Draft Replacement Maritime Patrol Aircraft (RMPA) Staff Requirement. Following Analysis of the Industry Responses, the Equipment Approvals Committee Endorsed the Requirement and Approved an Invitation to Tender Phase Whereby Four Companies (BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin, Loral and Dassault) Were Invited to Provide Detailed Technical and Commercial Proposals for an Aircraft to Meet the Endorsed Staff Requirement. Dassault Withdrew from the Competition in January 1996, and Whilst Lockheed Martin and Loral Merged in May 1996, They Maintained the Two Separate Proposals until the Competition Concluded. Following Assessment of These Responses, Selection of BAE Systems’ Nimrod 2000 (Later to be Re-Designated Nimrod MRA4) Offer Was Approved by Equipment Approvals Committee and Ministers in July 1996. This Was the Equivalent of Main Gate Approval.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
<th>proportion of Total Estimated Procurement Expenditure</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>actual Cost</Td>
<td>
5
</Td>
<td>
0.1%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td>
0.1%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>date of Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
July 1996
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date of Initial Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>length of Assessment Phase [months]</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5d. Cost Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Forecast at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
2813
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>expected Envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5e. ISD Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>latest Acceptable</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
April 2003
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability Was Expected to be Available at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

THIS PAGE is INTENTIONALLY BLANK
