---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Page_from: 364.0
Page_to: 370.0
Project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_364_370.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project Title</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>team Responsible</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>afloat Support</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>senior Responsible Owner Date Appointed</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brigadier John Brittain (Expeditionary Logistic and Support Capabil21st March 2011</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name Current Status of Projects
/</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Pre-Main Investment Decision Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker Pre-Main Investment Decision Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Fleet Solid Support Ships Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Provide Afloat Logistic Support to UK and Allied Maritime Task Groups at Sea and their Amphibious Components Operating Ashore. Although not Strictly a One-for-One Replacement Programme, New Vessels will Incrementally Replace Much of the Existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary Flotilla. the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability is Designed to Support Three Distinct Types of Maritime Task Group: Carrier Strike, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Security. the Demands of Each Differ Significantly, but are all Composed of Three Common Elements:
Bulk Consumables - Fuel and Potable Water which are Transferred by Hose. Non-Bulk Consumables - Food, Ammunition and General Stores. Solid Cargo which is Transferred in Unit Loads, Either Ship to Ship or Ship to Shore. Forward Aviation Support - The Provision of Helicopter Basing and Operating Facilities to Accommodate some of the Task Group’s Aircraft or to Provide Operational Flexibility During a Campaign. the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability will be in Service into the 2050s and will be Designed to Accommodate the Requirements of Current and Known Future Force Structures, Including Type 45, the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers, Joint Combat Aircraft and Type 26 Global Combat Ship. Tankers will Provide Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group. Solid Support Ships, Previously Referred to as Fleet Solid Support and Amphibious Combat Stores Ship, will Provide Non Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group. the Capability to be Provided is Essential to the Evolving Logistic Support Needs of the Royal Navy. the Proposed Procurement Profile of Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Ships Has Been Matched to this Need, the Initial Focus Being on the Double-Hulled Tankers which are Required in Order to Comply with International Maritime Environmental Standards.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme Received Formal Approval to Enter Its

Assessment

Phase in July 2005 Based on an Alliance Strategy. Following a Review of the Procurement Strategy in 2007, the Alliance Strategy Was Terminated. a New Strategy, Based on a ‘competitive and Adaptive’
Approach, Was Approved and Reflected the Need to Procure the Tanker Element of the Programme Separately in Order to Comply with International Maritime Legislation. in Addition Approval Was Granted for the Designation and Delegation of the Heavy Replenishment at Sea Project as a Separate Category D Project. Solid Support Ships will Now Form a Separate Strategy to be Considered with Wider UK Industrial Interests. an Open International Competition Was Launched for the Design and Build of Up to Six Fleet Tankers but Was Cancelled Following the Department's Examination of Its Equipment Programme in 2008. a Review of the Requirements and Procurement Strategy Was Undertaken which Concluded that a more Open Procurement Strategy to Consider a Range of Possible Solutions and which Take Account of Current Market Conditions is more Likely to Secure Best Value for Money for the MOD. on this Basis a New International Competition for Up to Six Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers Was Launched in October 2009 which Was Conducted using the Competitive Dialogue Process. Subsequently the Requirement Was Reduced from Six Ships to Four.

Following Assessment of Initial Pre Qualification Questionnaires Six Companies Were Invited to Proceed to the Next Stage of the Competition. the Competition Was Conducted over Three Stages Stage 1 -
Invitation to Submit Outline Solutions Took Place over March to September 2010. Stage 2 - Invitation to

Submit Detailed Solutions Commenced in October 2010 and Continued Through to Invitation to Submit

Final Bids in October 2011 which Was Issued to Three Companies; Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (Republic of Korea), Fincantieri (Italy), Hyundai Heavy Industries (Republic of Korea). Three Companies Withdrew Earlier in the Competition; Flensburger Schiffbau-Gesellschaft (Germany); Knutsen OAS Ltd in June 2011 and A&P Group Ltd in August 2011.

The Current Approved Budget for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase is £44m and the Current Forecast for the Assessment Phase, Including Early Design and Requirement Work for Solid Support Ships is \\\ (Tanker £14million, Solid Support Ships,
\\\). Due to the Planned Phased Nature of the Project, Further Assessment and Design Work on Fleet Solid Support Ships will Take Place after the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker Main Investment Decision, and the Current Total Forecast for this Later Work is \\\ Bringing the Total Expected Cost of Assessment Work and Later Design for Future Classes to \\\.

## A.3. in-Year Progress

The Main Gate Business Case for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers Was Considered and Approved by the Investment Approvals Committee in October 2011. the Performance Cost and Time Envelope Put Forward for Approval Was Based on Indicative Information Available and the Approval of which Enabled the Department to Proceed to the Final Bid Stage of the Competition, which Was Issued in October 2011. Further Departmental and HM Treasury Approval to Proceed to Contract Award Was Received in

January 2012 and Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Was Named as the Preferred Bidder on 22 February 2012. the Contract Was Awarded 9 March 2012. in Accordance with the Department's Approval Process, the Project Performance, Cost and Time will be Calculated using the Detail of the Winning Bid and Detail of the Remainder of Project Activity and will be Reported Back to the Investment Approvals Committee in Spring/Summer 2012; this will Form the Main Gate Approval Baseline for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker Project. Following Planning Round 2012 the Tanker Element of the Programme is to be Considered as Part of the Core Equipment Programme. the Fleet Solid Support Element of the Programme will be Considered a Non Core Equipment Programme which will Require Further Departmental Review Before Further Work is Undertaken.

## A.4. Capability Risks

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Deliver Future Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships, Replacing the Current Capability, to Support the Future Royal Navy. Without the Support of These Ships, the Ability of the Royal Navy to Carry Out Global Operations will be Severely Restricted. Double Hulled Naval Tankers are Required as Soon as is Practicable to Comply with International Maritime Legislation; the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Currently Operates Two Double Hulled Tankers and Four Single Hulled Tankers under Exemption from Legislation. the Number of Ships with Single Hulled Tanks Has Reduced from Six to Four in the Last Year as a Result of Strategic Defence and Security Review. All Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships are Maintained to UK Regulatory and Classifications Standards; Should this Certification and Classification be Withdrawn for Single Hulled Tankers, their Operation Would Cease Immediately Leading to Severe Operational Limitations on the Ability of the Royal Navy to Operate Worldwide and in Anything but the Most Benign Environments. Foreign Nations Have Already Begun to Deny Port Access for Single Hulled Tankers and this Situation will be Exacerbated as a Consequence of any Environmental Incident, MOD Shipping Related or Not. Programming for Operations Takes Account of Environmental Restrictions as Well as Limitations on Ships Due to their Material State; for Example some of the Older Ships are Unable to Operate in Colder Climates Due to the Steel in their Ageing Hulls Becoming Brittle. These Ships will be Replaced as the Double Hulled Tanker Element of the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme is Delivered.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project /
Increment Title
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker
</Td>
<td>
International Competition, Competitive Dialogue
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td><sup>1</Sup></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Forecast (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Fleet Solid Support Ships</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>16</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>17</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>16</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>17</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1

The Forecast Cost for the Assessment Phase Includes the Cost of the Tanker Assessment Phase of £14m and

Fleet Solid Support Ships of \\\. It also Includes \\\ for Post Main Gate Assessment and Design Work for

Fleet Solid Support Ships that is not yet Approved. the Actual Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability

Assessment Phase Expenditure is Within Approved Budget

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>july 2005</Td>
<td>january 2012</Td>
<td>78</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Fleet Solid Support Ships</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicab

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
1-10
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable
