---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Morpheus
Page_from: 228.0
Page_to: 234.0
Project_label: Morpheus
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_228_234.md
---
<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MORPHEUS
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Battlefield Tactical CIS Delivery Team
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Major General Nick Pope
</Td>
<td>16 October 2013</Td>
<td>oct 2016</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MORPHEUS Assessment Phase 1
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">initial Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The MORPHEUS Project (Previously Known as the Land Environment Tactical Communications and

Information Systems (LE TacCIS) Successor Sub-Programme) is the Principal Capability Element of the

LE TacCIS Capability Change Programme. It will Provide Tactical Communication Information Systems for Littoral, Land and Air-Land Force Elements Operating in the Land Environment. Inherent in the Requirement to Deliver to These Domains is the Challenge of Integrating MORPHEUS, in Itself a System of Systems, into a Wide Array of Equally Complex Platforms from the Individual Rifleman Through Manoeuvre Platforms Including Aircraft and Ships. It Must Interface with Other LE TacCIS Capabilities Such as Falcon and Information Systems and Services Wider Architectures and with International Allies.

MORPHEUS will Replace the Current Portfolio of Tactical Communication Capability, Dominated by Bowman, which Entered Service in 2004 and Currently Has an Out of Service Date of 2026. While MORPHEUS is Undergoing Assessment There is a Requirement to Sustain the Current Capability with a Continuous Need to Address Obsolescence And, where Appropriate and Affordable, Exploit Rapidly Developing Technology.

An Integral Element of the MORPHEUS Project is the Provision of Communications and Situational Awareness to the Dismounted Close Combat User Where, in this Instance, the Dismounted Situational Awareness Project will be an Important Contributory Element.

MORPHEUS is not Solely a Technology Project. Key to Realising MORPHEUS and the Wider LE TacCIS Change Programme Benefits, Within which it is Nested, will be the Supporting Business Model and the Transition Plan for Implementation of both the Technical Architectures and the Relationship with Suppliers. Increasing Competition is a Critical Factor in the Design of the Supporting Business Model.

The Options Being Assessed Range from Sustaining the Current Systems, to Evolution of These Systems Through to their Wholesale Replacement. Within the LETacCIS Programme, the Legacy Support Project and Legacy Systems Update Projects will Sustain the Current Systems Whilst MORPHEUS will Provide Continued Support and Evolution Beyond the Current Bowman ComBAT and Information Platform (BCIP) Out of Service Date.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Initial Gate Approval, Issued in May 2013, Authorised Part 1 of the Assessment Phase to Assess and Select Acquisition Options to be Taken Through to Assessment Phase 2. Assessment Phase 1 is Required to Submit a Review Note to Recommend Two Acquisition Options Consisting of Physical Architecture Options, Transition Plans and Supporting Business Models, and Appoint a Delivery Partner in July 2016 (50% Confidence). It will also Request Approval for Assessment Phase 2 which will Work to Submit a Main Gate Approval and Select a System Design to Build and Implement.

The Selection of Two Options will be Undertaken Through a Complex Appraisal of Operational Effectiveness and Investment. This will Provide the Two Optimum High Level Acquisition Options to be Taken Forward, Together with an Option to Reduce Whole Life Costs by 10%. a Delivery Partner will Mature These Acquisition Options to the Appropriate Level for a Decision at Main Gate. the Context Within which any New System will Need to Operate will be Complex; Integration Within MOD Wide Information Enterprise; Integration Onto a Diverse Platform Fleet (Including, Inter Alia, Complex Armoured Vehicles, Helicopters and Dismounted Soldiers) and the Future MOD Environment; Future Force 2020, Coupled with Rapidly Developing Technology Could Lead to MORPHEUS Delivering in more than One Increment. Main Gate 1 is Expected to be Submitted in May 2018, and Could be Followed by Review Notes for Approval for Subsequent Increments (Acquisition Option Dependent).

To Support the Options Analysis a Three Year Contract Has Been Placed with Atkins Ltd to Bring in Expertise in Evaluating Operational Efficiency and the Cost of Complex System Design Options as the MORPHEUS Customer Friend. in Addition to This, the NEO Consortium Has Been Appointed as the MORPHEUS Systems House to Produce Prospective Design Options for Each Acquisition Option and Cost Them Through Life. This will be Undertaken Through a 15-Month Programme of Work in Consultation with Industry Bodies that Have Expressed Interest in the MORPHEUS Programme.

## A.3. in-Year Progress

On 5 Jan 15, the MORPHEUS Systems House Contract Was Awarded to PA Consulting as the Lead for the NEO Consortium with QinetiQ, Roke and CGI as Partners. the Purpose of Systems House is to Gather Evidence and Develop Acquisition Options to Support the Authority’s Initial Investment Decision at Review Note. the Systems House Underwent a Short but Aggressive Mobilisation Period and is Now Engaging Across Industry to Develop Acquisition Options Based Upon Current Market Experience and Future Technology Plans. System Characteristics of the Current Capabilities are Being Documented, and Together with MOD Options for Sustaining the Current Systems, will Form the Baseline for the Systems House to Commence Design Work on the Future Systems. Five MOD Personnel are Embedded with Systems House.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Current Tactical CIS Capability is Provided by a Combination of Bowman and Other Systems. the High Number of Urgent Operational Requirements on Operations in Afghanistan (Op HERRICK) Identified that in Service Capability No Longer Meets the Full Breadth and Depth of User Needs and Expectations. the Legacy Systems Update Project will Address Obsolescence and some User Needs Within the Current Capability Baseline. However, the MORPHEUS Project is Needed to Deliver an Enduring Solution Against Identified Gaps and Enable:

-   Command Agility,

-   Information Superiority,

-   Information Exploitation for Mobile and Static Users from Formation Headquarters to Individual Service Personnel and Platforms,

-   Exploit Advances in Information Technology,

-   the Linking of Sensors, Information and Intelligence Providers, Commanders and Effectors in Order that UK Forces Engaged in Combined, Joint, Intergovernmental, Interagency, Multinational Operations in the Land Environment to Remain Inside the Decision/Action Cycle of Its Adversaries.

To Mitigate the Issues Caused by the Rapid Developments in both Civilian and Military Communication Information Systems, MORPHEUS will Need to be Flexible, Adaptable, Easy to Reconfigure and Upgrade – Characteristics that are not Present in Current Systems.

System Level Obsolescence of the Current Capability will Cause Degradation in Information Services in this Decade and a Widening of the Capability Gap.

Efficient Tactical Communication Information Systems is Key in Ensuring Mission Success, Whilst Minimising Casualties. Delays to the MORPHEUS Programme will Compound the Current Gap Between the User Need and Current System Capability as Evidenced Through Urgent Operational Requirements Delivered on Op HERRICK. There will also be a Exponential Increase in the Operational Risks Inherent in Current Systems when Compared to the Capabilities of Potential Adversaries and Risks Against Delivering Wider LE TacCIS Programme Benefits.

## A.4. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date / Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>legacy Systems Update</Td>
<td>
IOC 2018
</Td>
<td>
Initial Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>crypto Enabling Services</Td>
<td>
NK
</Td>
<td>
Pre Initial Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>operational Information Services</Td>
<td>
IOC 2018
</Td>
<td>
Pre Initial Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.5. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>morpheus</Td>
<td>atkins</Td>
<td>assessment Phase 1 –
Operational Analysis</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>
Competitive – UK
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>morpheus</Td>
<td>pa Consulting</Td>
<td>assessment Phase 1 –

Systems House
</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>
Competitive – UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>in-Service Capabilities are Supported Through the Legacy Support Project by a Number of Providers, for which Current Contracts Expire in March 2019. the Future Support Strategy for MORPHEUS is to Migrate to a Single Logtistic Services and Support Provider Adopting Best Practice and Seek to Exploit the Benefits of a more Open and Modular Solution. This ‘future Support Solution’ will be Developed Through the Assessment Phase 2, which will Replace the Legacy Support Project in April 2019. This is Expected to be Approved at the MORPHEUS Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>morpheus Assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>51</Td>
<td>41</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>morpheus Assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>190</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>51</Td>
<td>231</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name | Lowest Forecast (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Forecast (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| MORPHEUS                   | 2538                     | 2903                  | 3495                      |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost – N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>12</Td>
<td>18</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>12</Td>
<td>18</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>forecast Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment

Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>may 2013</Td>
<td>review Note July 2016</Td>
<td>39 Months</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>
December 2016
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Forecast</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>pase – Future Support Provision</Td>
<td>april 2019</Td>
<td>april 2019</Td>
<td>may 2020</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – N/a

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

## C.5.1 Scope of Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Contract Go-Live Date – N/a

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation – N/a

### C.5.2.2 Go-Live Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.3 Progress Against Approved End of Support / Training / PFI Contract Date – N/a

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.4 Other Costs Resulting from Support Cost Variation – N/a

## C.5.5 Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Support Contract Variation – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level – N/a

Assessing a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) to MORPHEUS will not be Possible until the High Level Design Options are Explored in Detail in Assessment Phase 2.

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD) – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM) – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a
