---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
Page_from: 233.0
Page_to: 241.0
Project_label: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_233_241.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 52%" />
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Alex Burton
</Td>
<td>september 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

There is a Need to Replace the 13 Type 23 Surface Combatant Capability Before the Safe Operating Standard for Legacy Ships is Withdrawn and the Platforms Become Obsolete. Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review it Was Confirmed that this Enduring Requirement will be Delivered by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship.

The Type 26 Global Combat Ship is Planned to be a Globally Deployable and Sustainable Warship that will Form the Spine of the Royal Navy’s Future Fleet. It will be a Task Group Enabled Anti Submarine Warfare Warship and will Combine the Capabilities Necessary to Protect Maritime Task Groups, the Strategic Deterrent and Land Forces, with the Flexibility to Conduct a Wide Range of Other Tasks. the Type

26 Global Combat Ship Retains the Combat Power that Had Been Provisioned for the Type 26 (C1) and C2 Originally, Whilst Enhancing Endurance and Intelligence Gathering Attributes in a Common, Acoustically Quiet Hull.

Type 23s Were Designed for an 18 Year Life but this Has Been Extended to Almost Twice the Original Design Life \\\. the Current Planning Assumption is to Replace the Ships under the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Programme, Currently Based on One Class of Up to 13 Ships Delivered in Two Variants; Anti Submarine Warfare and General Purpose Vessels.

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

The Sustained Surface Combatant Capability Pathfinder Project Recommended a Three-Class Solution for Future Surface Combatant. the First Class, Type 26 (C1), a Task-Group Enabled Anti-Submarine Warfare Frigate. the Second, C2, a General Purpose Frigate. the Third, C3, to Provide Mine

Countermeasure, Hydrographic and Patrol Capabilities. the Sustained Surface Combatant Capability Pathfinder Highlighted a Need for Up to Ten Type 26 (C1) and Eight C2s. Type 26 (C1) Was to be Built First at a Rate of One per Year, Followed by C2. This Approach also Met the Needs of Industrial Sustainability Whilst Fulfilling the Royal Navy Requirement.

It Was on this Basis that the Concept Phase Progressed to Form the Basis of the Initial Gate Approval for Type 26 (C1) on 18 March 2010. It Was Anticipated that Main Gate Approval Would be Sought by the Middle of the Decade and Estimated that for a Ten Ship Class the Procurement Cost Would be \\\ (Inclusive of VAT and Inflation), with a Whole Life Cost of \\\ (Inclusive of VAT and Inflation), Assuming a Ship Life of 25 Years. It Was also Recognised that There Would be a Strategic Defence and Security Review Following the General Election. Subsequently as Part of the Approval, it Was Planned that There Would be a Mid-Phase Review Point to Assess the Impact of any Changes in Policy Driven by that Review.

The Approved Budgetary Level (VAT Inc) for the Non-Competitive Procurement of the Assessment Work at 50% Confidence, Consisted of
£158.4m Total Direct Resource Consumption. the Approval from the Investment Approvals Board Capped the “not to Exceed” Value of the Assessment Phase at this 50% Level. All Non-UK New Design and Build Options Were Discounted at the Initial Gate, as Recorded in the Investment Appraisal, Noting the over-Arching Agreement with BAE Systems Maritime – Naval Ships in the Terms of Business Agreement (Dated 21 July 2009).

Subject to Approvals and Value for Money Assessments, the Type 26 (C1) is Expected to be Procured without Competition from BAE Systems Maritime - Naval Ships under the Terms of Business Agreement (Dated 21 July 2009). a Joint Team is in Place and Working at a Number of BAE Systems’ Sites, Primarily in Glasgow and Filton (where the MOD Members of the Joint Team are Based). as Part of This, it is Intended that Approval for a Commitment to the Support Solution, Including Costs from the Supply Chain, will be Sought at the Main Gate 2 Approval at the End of the Assessment Phase.

Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review, the Decision Was Taken to Change to a Type 26 Global Combat Ship Design that is Smaller, with Reduced Capability Scope and more Exportable Whilst Still Meeting the Needs of the Royal Navy and Maintaining the Needs of Industrial Sustainability. the Strategic Defence and Security Review Reduced the Total Surface Fleet to 19 Frigates and Destroyers which will Include Six Type 45 Destroyers and the Current Type 23 Frigates which will be Replaced by Type 26 Global Combat Ship after 2020.this Reduced the Overall Procurement Cost of the Programme (not Including Support Costs) from \\\.

The Alignment of Renamed Type 26 Global Combat Ship Against the Goals of the Strategic Defence and Security Review Was Confirmed in an Information Note Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in January 2011. This Information Note Stated That:

1.  Approval will be Split into Two Parts. Approval (Main Gate 1) will Seek Endorsement of the Requirements to be Delivered by Type 26 Global Combat Ship, with Main Gate 2, the Main Investment Decision Following at the End of the Assessment Phase. This will Allow Detailed Costing and Design Work to Proceed Against a Defined Requirement so that the Project can Present an Affordable Design Proposal for Approval at Main Gate 2 and Subsequent Contract Signing;

2.  the Remaining Programme Key Milestones Remain Unchanged, with Planned Service Entry as Soon as Possible after 2020;

3.  Type 26 Global Combat Ship Design is Considered to Have Significant Export Potential with Considerable Effort Being Expended to Encourage Overseas Partner Interest.

The Design and Study Work for the Analysis of Options Stage Concluded in the Capability Decision Point, Held in November 2011. This Identified a Baseline Design from which more Detailed Design Work Has Commenced, Including the Assessment of that Design which is Being Matured During the Remainder of the Assessment Phase. the Capability Decision Point Informed the Main Gate 1 Submission which Has Been Endorsed by the MOD Investment Approvals Committee. Main Gate 1 Provided Approval for the Project Team to Continue the Assessment Phase with the Detailed Design Work on the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Capability Architecture, Down Selected on the Basis of the Capability Decision Point Output; and for the Support Solution to Enter Its Assessment Phase. the Detailed Design Phase and Industry Engagement Process will Underpin the Programme’s Main Gate 2 at the End of the Assessment Phase, which is Expected to Conclude Towards the Middle of this Decade, Allowing the Production Phase to Begin Within the Same Timescales. \\\

In Order to Maximise Type 26 Global Combat Ship Export Potential to Realise Wider Benefits to the MOD, Industry and the UK, Engagement Has Begun with Several Countries to Determine their Requirements and How These can be Matched with Type 26 Global Combat Ship. the Design is Being Developed in Close Partnership with Industry to Improve the Opportunities for These Requirements to be Realised in the Design.

## A.3. in-Year Progress

Since the MOD Investment Approvals Committee Endorsement of the Programme at Main Gate 1 in May 2012, the Project Team Has Continued the Assessment Phase to Develop the Detailed Specifications of the Ship Design and Maturity of Data in Order to Move Forward Successfully in to the Demonstration, Manufacture and Support Phases at Main Gate 2, the Main Investment Decision. Work Has Continued to Ensure the Ship Design and Cost Data is Fully Mature at Cut Steel Whilst Continuing Supply Chain Engagement. This will Reduce the Risks and Associated Cost of Downstream Work, Thus Avoiding Problems Encountered by Recent Programmes.

\\\

Maritime Indirect Fires System Has Been Brought under the Programme Umbrella, and Its Main Gate Approval will be Integrated into the T26 Main Gate 2 Submission. Maritime Indirect Fires System is an Open Competition Led by the MOD for a Medium Calibre Gun System and which Passed Its Own Initial Gate in September 2012. the Invitation to Negotiate Was Issued in March 2013 to Companies Who Successfully Completed the Pre-Qualification Questionnaire. \\\

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Strategic Defence and Security Review Confirmed the Need for Future Force 2020 to Provide Maritime Defence of the UK and Its South Atlantic Overseas Territories. Capabilities Should Include a Surface Fleet of 19 Frigates and Destroyers Providing Military Flexibility Across a Variety of Operations, Including Six Type 45 Destroyers and the Current Type 23 Frigates. However There is a Need to Replace the Type 22 and Type 23 Surface Combatant Capability Before the Safe Operating Standard for Legacy Ships is Withdrawn and the Platforms Become Obsolete.

Type 23s Were Designed for an 18 Year Life but this Has Been Extended to Almost Twice the Original Design Life. \\\ There is No Scope to Extend the Current Platforms Further without Extensive, Currently Unaffordable Modifications. if Further Extension Was Required the Hull Strength, Stability and Legislative Safety Compliance Would Need to be Addressed by Work that Removes Capability, Does not Reduce the Risk to the Generation of Forces at Readiness and Costs more than a New Build Option. the Strategic Defence and Security Review Confirmed that as Soon as Possible after 2020 the Type 23 Frigates will be Replaced by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship which will be Designed to be Easily Adapted to Change Roles and Capabilities Depending on the Strategic Circumstances.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Title of Associated Project
</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Concept Phase
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project /
Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 98%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
The Project Assessment Phase Approval Covers Funding for Concept and Assessment Phase Support Activities. the Assessment Phase Contract Was Placed Non-Competitively under the BAE Systems Maritime - Naval Ships Terms of Business Agreement. Support Initial Gate which Was Approved as Part of the Main Gate 1 Submission to the Investment Approvals Committee Outlined the Initial Commercial Arrangement to be Placed Following Main Gate 2 Approval. the Current Assumption is that the Initial Commercial Arrangement to be Placed Following Main Gate 2 Approval, will Be:

<ol Type="a">
<li>a Pricing Framework Agreed with the Partners Within the Surface Ship Support Alliance / Maritime Support Delivery Framework for Support at the Platform Level Covering Class Output Management, Fleet Time Maintenance and Upkeep Activity. at this Stage some Aspects of the Commercial Agreements will be Based on Pricing Formulae Relating Variations in Performance Targets, Operational and Other Parameters. During the Build of the First of Class, These Arrangements will be Firmed Up so that Planned Maintenance and in Service Activities are Priced as Far as Possible for a Complete Support Cycle.</Li>
<li>tailored Equipment Support Contracts Appropriate to the Different Equipment Characteristics. the Strategic Support Options of Surface Ship Support Alliance or the Public Sector Comparator will Establish the Means by which Support will be Delivered in an Integrated Way at Whole Ship Level. This Level of Support is Underpinned by Support of the Constituent Equipments and Systems, which will be Delivered Through Differing Arrangements Depending on a Range of Factors Such as Whether the Equipment is Unique to Type 26 Global Combat Ship, Whether it is Commercial Off the Shelf or Its Original Procurement Route. These Equipment Support Arrangements in Turn Influence the Platform Level Solution. It is the Intent to Seek Contractible Offers for Long Term Support Arrangements Concurrently with Contracting for Initial Procurement to the Extent Practicable.</Li>
</Ol>

The Aim of the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Project at Initial Gate Was to Provide the Approval Authority with a Cost for all Support Elements at Main Gate 2 as Far as Possible, Based on Contractable Offers from Industry. Work During the Assessment Phase Has Proven that this will not be Achievable in all Areas. the Project Team may Therefore Seek Approval at Main Gate 2 for an Integrated Demonstration, Manufacture and Support Contract with Commitment Sought for Development, Procurement and Delivery of in-Service Support and New to Service Training. This Would Comprise a Mixture of Contractual Commitment to BAE, Type 26 Global Combat Ship Amendments to Existing Enterprise Support Arrangements and Development Work for Later Placing of Contracts as the Design and Fleet Wide Support Arrangements Mature.
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>support Title</Th>
<th>
Contractor
</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>in-Service Support Contract for Type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems
</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/ Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>158</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
158
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

The Type 26 Global Combat Ship is Currently in the Assessment Phase with Investigations into the Cost of Delivering the Capability Being Assessed. as Such, it Would not be Appropriate at this Time to Disclose the Immature Costs of Type 26.

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>budgeted for Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>highest Forecast (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>45</Td>
<td>55</Td>
<td>100</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>45</Td>
<td>55</Td>
<td>100</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>budgeted for Forecast</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td>
1-10
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable

THE MAJOR PROJECTS REPORT 2013

CONCEPT PHASE PROJECTS
