---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Eagle/Sustain Sentry
Page_from: 55.0
Page_to: 59.0
Project_label: Eagle/Sustain Sentry
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_55_59.md
---
Team Responsible

Sentry Project Team

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Head of Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability

Number of Projects / Increments

One

Current Status of Projects / Increments

Pre Main Investment Decision – Project Eagle

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Royal Air Force’s Fleet of Sentry \[airborne Early Warning Mk 1\]
Aircraft Entered Service in 1992 to Provide an Airborne Early Warning Capability, Through Extended Surveillance for Air Attack and Limited Functions to Control and Direct Air Operations. During Successive Operations it Was Identified that an Air Warning and Control System Capability (to Carry Out Surveillance, Provide Communications and Command and Control Air Battles) Was Required. the Lack of an Air Battle Management Capability (Including the Control of Defensive and Offensive Fighter Aircraft, Management of Air-to-Air Refuelling and Coordinating Friendly Aircraft to Ensure their Safety of Flight) and Deficiencies in Electronic Support Measures (Sensors for Detection of Electronic Pulses Emitted by Aircraft, Missiles, Ground Based and Maritime Radar Systems), Together with Equipment Obsolescence, Were Identified as Barriers to Providing Future Defence Capability. Project Eagle Was Established to Meet this Air Battle Management Capability Need.

During the Assessment Phase of Project Eagle the Sentry Project Team, Was Unable to Identify an Affordable Programme that Would Address the Requirement. the Requirement Was then De-Scoped to an Obsolescence Management Programme, that Would Address the Increasing Obsolescence Issues and Sustain the Current and Mandated Capability, to be Known as the Sustain Sentry Programme. the Requirement for the Sustain Sentry Programme is to Maintain Capability at No less than the Current Levels, Introducing a Mode S Identification Friend or Foe Interrogator (System of Aircraft Identification) Initially and then Addressing Obsolescence in Three Areas: Communications; Mission System; and Electronic Support Measures.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Approval of the Project Eagle Initial Gate Business Case Endorsed a Competitive Acquisition Strategy And, in January 2005, Six Potential Prime Contractors Were Invited to Submit Proposals to Satisfy the Eagle Capability and User Needs, Based on a Detailed Set of System Requirements.

In May 2005, Recognising that some Elements of the Communications Systems on the Aircraft Were Forecast to Become Obsolete, the Scope of Project Eagle Was Amended to Include the Replacement of Those Elements. This Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in August 2005.

In May 2006, the Investment Approvals Board Noted the Project Review Board’s Decision to Downselect from Six to Two Potential Prime Contractors: Boeing and Lockheed Martin. It Was Intended that both of These Companies Would be Invited to Construct a Technical Demonstrator for the Mission System and Refine their Earlier Proposals for the Electronic Support Measures and Communication System Replacements. However, in July 2006, Following a MoD Financial Commitment Review, the Award of Contracts for the Technical Demonstration Phase Was Cancelled. This Resulted in the Cessation of any Further Development by Lockheed Martin, Whilst Boeing Was Fortunate in that it Was Able to Continue to Develop Its System (Known as Block 40/45) as Part of a Separately Funded Requirement for the United States Air Force.

In October 2006, the Eagle Project Board Determined that the Risks Associated with the Acquisition of the Boeing Solution Were Acceptable and Instructed the Eagle Project Team to Cancel the Existing Competition Based Procurement Strategy and Consider the Acquisition of the Eagle Capability, Based on the Boeing Solution.

In Parallel, During Late 2006/Early 2007 Two Funding Options Were Proposed by the Project Sponsor; One to Defer the Project by Four Years and One for Two Years. the Four Year Deferral Option Was Later Withdrawn; Primarily Because of the Adverse Affect on Defence Capability and the Projected Cost of Maintaining the Increasingly Obsolescent Legacy Systems. the Two Year Deferral Option Was Amended to a ‘de-Scope’ Option on the Basis that it Would be Possible to Change some Elements of the UK Requirement to Take Advantage of the Boeing Block 40/45 Solution, Being Taken Forward for the United States Air Force. It Was Considered that this Was the Only Way in which the Necessary Capability Could be Acquired and Still Maintain the Planned in-Service Date. the Defence Management Board Approved an Increased and Revised Funding Profile, in January 2007, and the Argument for a Single Source Approach Was Approved by Review Note to the Investment Approvals Board in March 2007.

During the Early Part of 2008 Project Eagle Was Included in a MOD Departmental Spending Review Programme that Resulted in the Recommendation to Defer the Project by Two Years. This Recommendation Was Approved at Ministerial Level in April 2008.

As Part of the Same Spending Review, an Option Was Taken to Provide the Sentry Aircraft with a Mode S Identification Friend or Foe Interrogation Capability. in January 2009 the Sentry Project Board Determined that the Boeing Block 40/45 Solution Was not Affordable. a Full Capability Upgrade Was No Longer Seen as Viable and an Option Was Implemented in Spending Review 2009 that Descoped Project Eagle. It Was Apparent that the Focus of Sentry Activity Needed to Shift to Capability Sustainment in Order to Deliver the Civil Aviation Authority-Mandated Mode S Identification Friend or Foe Interrogation Update and to Address Significant Obsolescence Issues Within the Aircraft’s Mission Communications Fit.

The Mode S Project Proceeded to Main Gate Independently to Meet the Civil Aviation Authority Mandated Deadline for the Introduction of this Essential Capability, and Expenditure of £52.5 M Approved by the Defence Equipment and Support Chief of Staff in January 2010. the Approved not to Exceed in-Service Date is July 2012, the Most Likely Initial Operating Capability Consisting of Three Aircraft and Sufficient Trained Crews by July 2012 and Full Operating Capability, Defined as Seven Aircraft and all Operation Crews Trained and Available for Tasking, by October 2012.

## A.3. Progress

An Information Note Informing the Investment Approvals Board of the Change of Strategy from Project

Eagle to Sustain Sentry Was Submitted in January 2010. Following the Response from the Investment

Approvals Board in February 2010, a Business Case Working Group Was Convened with the

Investment Appraisal Board Scrutiny Community, it Was Decided to Submit an Initial Gate Business Case Rather than a Review Note. This Effectively Placed the Project in Concept Phase, with an Initial Gate Submission Anticipated in September 2010.

The Sentry Project Team is Working with Its Industrial Partner Northrop Grumman to Develop the Sustain Sentry Programme Plan in Terms of Capability, Time and Cost.

Work is Continuing with Northrop Grumman to Agree the Contractual Terms and Conditions for the Delivery of the Mode S Capability. It is Expected that Terms and Conditions of the Mode S Contract will be Agreed in July 2010.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Loss of the Capability to Conduct Airborne Surveillance and Airborne Command and Control Would Remove the UK’s Ability to Undertake Airspace Control over UK and Overseas Territories from the Air During Times of Heightened Tension or Crisis, Eg, in Support of Homeland Defence Activities. It Would also Remove the Ability to Undertake Airspace Coordination and Air Superiority Operations in Support of National and Coalition Military Objectives.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td Colspan="4">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project Eagle</Td>
<td Colspan="4">single Source Procurement of Boeing Block 40/45</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not Applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Eagle</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>-13</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>-13</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Eagle</Td>
<td>
144
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
235
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not Applicable

## B.4. Unit Production Cost – not Applicable

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

| Description                             | Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2009 | in-Year Expenditure | Total Expenditure to 31 March 2010 |
|----------------------------------|--------------|------------|-------------|
| Assessment Phase (£m)                   | 3.3                                       | 0\.                     | 3\.                                    |
| Demonstration & Manufacture Phase (£m)  | \-                                        | \-                      | \-                                     |
| Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m) | \-                                        | \-                      | \-                                     |
| Total Expenditure (£m)                  | 3.3                                   | 0.4                 | 3.7                                |

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>actual Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Eagle</Td>
<td>january 2010<sup>11</Sup></Td>
<td>
December 2004
</Td>
<td>61</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>earliest

Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Eagle</Td>
<td>january 2011</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>december 2012<sup>12</Sup></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract - Not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance – not Applicable

1.  the Information Note Submitted and Noted in January 2010, Informed the Board that Eagle Was De-Scoped to Sustain Sentry. This Effectively Ended Eagle, Created Sustain Sentry and Sent the Project Back to Concept Phase.

2.  This Was the Planned Latest Approved Date for Project Eagle. the not to Exceed Date Stated in Section A.2 is for Mode S.

MAJOR PROJECTS REPORT 2010

POST- MAIN GATE PROJECTS
