---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
Page_from: 232.0
Page_to: 246.0
Project_label: Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_232_246.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Merlin Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Richard Stokes (Deterrent and Under Water Capabilit
</Td>
<td>
19 June 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects /</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Transition Phase for Future Rotorcraft Capability
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme will Update 30 Merlin MK1 Aircraft to Overcome Existing and Forecast Obsolescence Within the Weapon System Avionics to Ensure Sustainment of the Required Capability until the Planned Out of Service Date (2029). the Converted Aircraft will be Known as the Merlin Mk2.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Following Approval of the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Initial Gate Business Case, the Assessment Phase Contract Was Placed in June 2003. the Main Assessment Phase Activities Comprised:
Analysis of the User Requirements and Development of a Consolidated Set of System Requirements in the Form of a Systems Requirement Document. Production of System and Sub-Systems Design Requirements, and Seeking Initial Costed Proposals from Potential Suppliers. Conducting Trade-Off Studies to Identify the Best Value Solution where Options Exist. Developing a Coherent Plan for Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, Aligned to Other Existing and Planned Merlin Programmes. Undertaking Integrated Test, Evaluation and Acceptance Planning. Identification of the Risks to the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, and the Identification and Implementation of Mitigation Action to Reduce the Impact to an Acceptable Level. Produce Documentation and Costed Proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. Undertaking Initial Integrated Logistic Support Activities to Define a Solution Compliant with the Evolving Support Solution Envelope. Future Rotorcraft Capability Review During the Assessment Phase, MOD Embarked on a Review of all Future Rotorcraft Requirements under the Title of the Future Rotorcraft Capability Review. the Demonstration and Manufacture Proposal that Had Been Provided by Industry and the Associated Business Case Were Produced Before the Impact of the Future Rotorcraft Capability Review Was Known. the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Was Reviewed as Part of the Wider Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme. the Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme Determined that the Balance of Financial Investment over the First Four Years of the Equipment

Enter Text Here

Programme Between Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme and Lynx Wildcat Should be on a 50/50, 30/70, 30/70, 30/70 Basis Respectively. to Allow Industry to Continue Critical Path Activity and to Support the Reprogramming Activities Resulting from Future Rotorcraft Capability, the Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme Provided Transition Phase Funding (Six Months) to the Merlin Integrated Project Team for an Extension of the Assessment Phase Contract. a Further Transition Phase (Six Months) Was Required to Again Sustain Programme Momentum, Align it with Wider Future Rotorcraft Capability Requirements and Maintain Programme Viability During the Approvals Process.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Obtained Initial Gate Approval on 23 May 2003. Following the Assessment Phase and Re-Planning Following the Future Rotorcraft Capability Activity, Formal Ministerial and HMT Approval Was Given 20th December 2005 and the Contract Was Awarded to Lockheed Martin UK on the 21st December 2005.

In June 2007, Additional Factory Training Courses Were Added to the Contract in Order to Provide Training for the Royal Navy Training Team. This Would Allow the Trainers and Delivered Training Course to be Validated Prior to Converting Existing Mk1 Aircrew to Operate the Mk2.

In November 2007, a Decision Was Taken not to Proceed with the Implementation of Helicopter Electromechanical Actuation Technology (HEAT) in the Mk2 Aircraft; this Had Been a Contract Option from the Outset. It Was Determined that the Technology Was Too Immature to Pursue without Impacting the Overall Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme.

In January 2008 the System Preliminary Design Review Was Held. This Provided the First in Depth Review of the Emerging Design Solution that Would Meet the User’s Requirements.

Following the Helicopter Electro-Mechanical Actuation Technology Decision, the Solution for the Air Engineering Training Solution Could be Finalised. This Was an Upgrade to the Existing Mk1 Mechanical Training Devices and Was Contracted for in October 2008. in June 2009, Additional Maintainer Factory Training Was Contracted for to Ensure Coherence with the Aircraft Delivery Programme and Ensure Sustainable in Service Support at the Front Line. in Order to Minimise the Impact of the Transition from Mk1 to Mk2 on the Front Line, it Was Agreed to Retain a Mk1 Training Device in the Mk1 Configuration until the Mk1 Out of Service Date. This Was Agreed Commercially in November 2009.

The Critical Design Review Was Held in September 2008, this Froze the Design Baseline for the Production Programme. This Established the Baseline for the Training System and the Subsequent Training System Preliminary Design Review Was Held in February 2009, with the Subsequent Critical Design Review Taking Place in October 2009.

The First Production Readiness Review (PRR) for the Four Trials Aircraft Was Held in April 2009. the Second Production Readiness Review for the Initial Production Aircraft Was Held in August 2010.

Enter Text Here

The First Mk2 Aircraft (ZH826) Flew on Schedule in September 2010 at the Merlin System Configuration 1.0 – Avionics Only.

Following a Review with Industry the Training System Programme Was Reassessed and Re-Planned to Provide more Stability and Confidence that the Programme Needs Were Met. This Split Out the Ready for Training Date into Two Distinct Factors. It also Provided the Project Team with a Mechanism to Ensure Aircraft and Training System Fidelity Was Coherent Through Out the Programme. This Was Contracted in August 2010.

As Planning for the Introduction to Service of the Merlin Mk2 Became more Mature, it Became Clear that Minor Changes to the Production Programme Were Necessary to Ensure Minimum Impact to the Front Line Capability. It also Benefited Industry by Smoothing their Resource Profile. This Change Was Implemented in August 2010.

In November 2010, ZH826 Flew at the Next System Configuration, which Had the Mission Systems Enabled and Switched On.

In December 2010, Agreement Was Reached with Lockheed Martin on the Disposition and Solution to a Number of Acoustic Sub-System Issues that Were Related to the Core Military Off the Shelf (MOTS) Product. the Changes Required will be Implemented in Time for the Initial Deliveries to the Royal Navy.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

The Key Milestone for 2011/12 Was the Clearance of the Merlin System Configuration (MSC) Software Standard at Issue 3.0 which Supported the
‘ready for Trials’ Milestone. This Enabled Formal Flight Trials to Commence and Occurred on Schedule in July 2011. the Programme Uses a
'Fly-Fix-Fly' Philosophy that Has Delivered Further Increments of Maturing Software Builds (3.0.1, 3.0.2, 3.1, 3.1.1 and 3.2). All Activity Fully Supported Through a Thorough Safety and Airworthiness Process. Factory Training Was Delivered for the Combined Test Team to Facilitate the Trials Programme. Formal Acceptance of the Contracted System Requirements Document Commenced - Primarily Related to Legacy Mk1 Read Across. the Engineering Training Devices Have Commenced Production Following a Successful Technical Design Review that Froze the Design Baseline. the Third and Final Production Readiness Review Was Held on Schedule (28 July 11) and Signalled the Readiness for Full Rate Production which Commenced in January 2012.

In November 2011, an Issue with Data on Expiry Dates of Aircraft Components Within the Merlin Forward Fleet Led to a Temporary Cessation of Flying for the Entire Merlin Non-Operational Fleet. This Included all Mk2 Trials Aircraft. This Prevented Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Development Flying (2-3 Months) at a Critical Stage in the Programme and Effectively Missed One 'Fly-Fix-Fly' Cycle. in Addition, Programme Pressures Including New Certification Regulation with the Establishment of the Military Aviation Authority Has Increased the Overall Schedule Risk and is Reflected in the 50%
Confidence Date Moving to June 2014 (+ 4 Months).

## A.5. Capability Risks

The Merlin Mk1 is Responsible for Delivering Protection to the Royal Navy's Fleet from Sub-Surface Threats. It also Provides a Significant Contribution to their Overall Situational Awareness both above and Below the Water. the Programme is Designated to Sustain the Capability Out to the Current Out of Service Date. Without this Programme the Ability to Detect Sub-Surface Threats Would be Reduced; or if the Obsolescence Issues Were Addressed Through an Alternative Strategy (Piecemeal Approach) Lead to a Large Increase in Through-Life Costs.

## A.6. Associated Projects

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin

Aero Systems Integration Corporation (Significant (60% by Value) Sub-
Contract with AgustaWestland Yeovil)</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to

Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price until 2010, then Fixed Price Subject to

Variation of Price
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive Prime but ~60% at Sub-Contract Level (Across both Prime and AgustaWestland Contracts)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Support Strategy of the Merlin MK2 will be the Same Employed for the Current Merlin Mk1 &amp; Mk3, the Integrated Merlin Operation Support Contract. This is a Whole Life Aircraft Availability Contract that is Priced by Flying Hours Within a Defined Band with Incentives to Generate Fit-for-Purpose Aircraft to the Front Line. There are Five Key Elements of the Support Service:
Service Management Aircraft Provision Materiel Support Technical Support Training It is a 25 Year Contract (Started in 2006) and Priced in Five Year Tranches. the Five Years to March 2011 Had an Approval of  . the Second Five Year Pricing Period Starting April 2011 Has an Approval of
£634m (Including Non Cash RDEL). the Contract Supports the Current Fleet of 38 Merlin Mk1 (Reducing to 30 Mk2 by the End of this Pricing Period), 22 Merlin Mk3 and 6 Merlin Mk3a. It also Supports the Merlin Mk1 Training System. Combined Merlin MK1/2 Fleet Represents 56% of IMOS PP2 Funded Flying Hours. Combined Merlin MK3/3a Fleet Represents 44% of IMOS PP2 Funded Flying Hours. the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme will Deliver the Necessary Changes to Ensure that the Support Contract can Continue to Support Merlin Mk2. This Includes New Initial Provisioning Spares, New Aircraft Specialist Support Equipment and Associated Updates to Technical Publications. at Main Gate for Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme it Was Identified that During the Transition from Mk1 to MK2 There Would be a Potential £45m Cost for Provision of Spares. This Was Afforded Through Savings Arising During the Transition Due to Reductions in Mk1 Activity and Procured Through the Support Solution. However, Savings Were Subsequently Taken and the Affordability of the Spares Procurement Was in Doubt; £12m Remained in the Budget for Aircraft and Training Systems Spares. in Parallel Savings Were Identified in the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme of £29m (Due to the Termination of the Helicopter Electro-Mechanical Actuation Technology Element of the Programme and Reallocation of Funding for Aircraft Specialist Support Equipment). This Allowed the Required Spares Provision of a Total of £41m, some £4m Below the Original Estimate. Additionally Following a Risk Review and Based on Lessons Learnt from Other Programmes, it Was Determined that Procurement of the Spares Through the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Was Lower Risk Since it Ensured that the Spares and Aircraft Build Standards Were Aligned.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>integrated Merlin Operational Support</Td>
<td>
AgustaWestland (Yeovil) Primed, with a Lockheed Martin Sub Contract
</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>19</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
<td>2%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>transition Phase for Future Rotorcraft Capability</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>27</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>4%</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
798
</Td>
<td>
805
</Td>
<td>
812
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>805</Td>
<td>791</Td>
<td>-14</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>805</Td>
<td>791</Td>
<td>-14</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>increase in Cost for Inflation above 2% Costed in Main Gate Business Case Approval.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-29</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>saving Made Through the Reallocation of Funds Previously Attributed to Helicopter Electromechanical Actuation Technology (-£27m) and Aircraft Specialist Support Equipment (£2m) Now Used to Fund the Initial Procurement Spares</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-4
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in Outturn Costs Arising from Reduced Impact of Inflation as a Result of Earlier than Planned Completion of Work.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in Outturn Costs Arising from Reduced Impact of Inflation as a Result of Earlier than Planned Completion of Work.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in Outturn Costs Arising from Reduced Impact of Inflation as a Result of Earlier than Planned Completion of Work.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-14
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>integrated Merlin Operational Support</Td>
<td>629</Td>
<td>624</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
629
</Td>
<td>
624
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Integrated Merlin Operational Support

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>increase in Costs Due to Change in Euro Rate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>reduction in Cost Following Reconcilliation of Integrated Merlin Operational Support Pricing Period 2 Flying Hours at Euro Rate of 1.2079.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>imos Cumulative Flying Hours Volume Drops Outside of Contract Discount Range.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>additional Year 5 Activity Levels in Integrated Merlin Operational Support Pricing Period 2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.2 Operational Impact on Support / PFI Cost

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>27</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>27</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>414</Td>
<td>114</Td>
<td>528</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>109</Td>
<td>109</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>441</Td>
<td>223</Td>
<td>664</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>may 2003</Td>
<td>march 2006</Td>
<td>34</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
August 2013
</Td>
<td>
February 2014
</Td>
<td>
September 2014
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>the Operational Capability of the Delivered Aircraft Shall be Such that Commander-in-Chief Fleet (Advised by Combined Test Team) are Able to Declare that Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme is Ready for Operational Deployment in the Specified Roles. a Cumulative Total of at Least Six Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Aircraft Delivered to Royal Naval Air Station Culdrose. Logistic Support Available to Enable the Operation and Maintenance of all the Delivered Aircraft. Sufficient Trained Personnel to Achieve Required Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>february 2014</Td>
<td>june 2014</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>4</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
+4
</Td>
<td>change in Associated Project</Td>
<td>merlin Mk1 Urgent Technical Instruction (UTI) Caused Temporary Cessation of Flying. Variation Reflects Increase Risk Due to 2-3 Month Loss of Mk2 Trials Flying. Planned, and Contracted in Service Date (ISD), Remains at Sep 13.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+4
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 29%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project/Increment Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
</Td>
<td>
Not Applicable
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>delivery of 30th Aircraft</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.1 Scope of Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>integrated Merlin Operational Support</Td>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation

Integrated Merlin Operational Support

## C.5.3 Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract End Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>integrated Merlin Operational Support</Td>
<td>march 2016</Td>
<td>march 2016</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation

## C.5.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Support Cost Variation

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
95% GREEN
</Td>
<td>
95% GREEN
</Td>
<td>no Change</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>delivery of Required Equipment (Aircraft and Ground Equipment)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>delivery of Trained People, Including Training Systems</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>delivery of Necessary Support Products to Enable Logistics Support Date to be Met</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>delivery of Necessary Changes to Extant Infrastructure to Support the Required Capability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>delivery of Sufficient People (Aircrew and Maintainers) to Support Capability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>update Mk1 Concepts &amp; Doctrine to Reflect Capability Delivered Through Mk2</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>review/Update Organisation to Reflect Changes Caused by Introduction of Mk2</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>manage Information and Interface to Data Providers/Users, Including Interface to Defence Information Infrastructure.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training &amp;
Personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>a Number of Mitigation Measures Have Been Implemented that Have Reduced the Risk. This Includes a Phased Closure Approach and Additional Factory Training to Ensure Sufficient Trained People are Available to Support the Required Force Elements at Readiness.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training &amp;
Personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>affordability Decision Taken Prior to Contract Award Meant that the Ability to Train Mk1 Personnel Concurrently with Conversion of the Training Facilities to the Mk2 Standard Was not Possible. This Gives Rise to the Risk that Trained Personnel will not be Available to Sustain Mk1 Capability to Its Out of Service and Develop Those Required for Mk2. a Number of Mitigation Activities are Underway to Minimise the Impact of this Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</Td>
<td>equipment and Personnel</Td>
<td>attack. the User Shall be Able to Neutralise Confirmed Antisubmarine Warfare Threats.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>02</Td>
<td>equipment and Training</Td>
<td>deployable Search and Rescue (Maritime Only). the User Shall be Able to Conduct Naval Search and Rescue.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>03</Td>
<td>equipment and Logistics</Td>
<td>environment. the User Shall be Able to Operate in Environments Worldwide.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>04</Th>
<th>equipment and Personnel</Th>
<th>find. the User Shall be Able to Acquire Situational Awareness of the Under Water Battle Space and Above Water Battle Space.</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>05</Td>
<td>equipment and Information</Td>
<td>interoperability. the User Shall be Able to Exchange Tactical Information Between Authorities and Units.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>06</Td>
<td>equipment and Personnel</Td>
<td>lift. the User Shall be Able to Move Personnel and Material over Land and Sea.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>07</Td>
<td>training and Logistics</Td>
<td>logistical. the User Shall be Able to Easily Logistically Support the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>08</Td>
<td>equipment and Personnel</Td>
<td>operational Availability. the User Shall be Able to Have Available Force Elements at a Time and Place as Required to Complete the Mission.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>09</Td>
<td>equipment and Infrastructure</Td>
<td>operational Locations. the Solution Shall be Able to Operate to and from Host Platforms when Required.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>equipment and Training</Td>
<td>survivability. the User Shall Have Force Elements Capable of Surviving in Hostile and Warfighting Environments.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.4. Support Contract

## D.4.1 Integrated Merlin Operational Support

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>operational Serviceability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>02</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>forward Fleet Aircraft Health</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>03</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>merlin Training System</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>04</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>support to Other Platforms</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>4 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation
