---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: MERLIN CAPABILITY SUSTAINMENT PROGRAMME
page_from: 69.0
page_to: 76.0
project_label: Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_69_76.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

MERLIN CAPABILITY

SUSTAINMENT PROGRAMME

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

MERLIN

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Director Equipment Capability (Under Water Effect)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme will update 30 Merlin Mk1 aircraft to overcome existing and forecast obsolescence within the Weapon System Avionics to ensure sustainment of the required capability until the planned out of service date (2029). The approach taken is one of system level technology refresh of the key mission and air vehicle avionic systems. A core feature of the programme is the implementation of a flexible open architecture that will deliver lower cost of ownership, enable cost-effective future capability insertion and compliance with the latest safety legislation. The Demonstration &
Manufacture contract has been placed with Lockheed Martin Aero Systems Integration Corporation, UK.

The programme includes the necessary updates to the support and training environments. Towards the end of the Assessment Phase, the programme was brought into the Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme. The Future Rotorcraft Capability programme provided funding to support a transition phase (six months) that enabled critical path Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme activities to continue while work continued to produce a coherent rotorcraft programme across the MoD. A further transition phase (six months), which was subsequently included within the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Main Gate approval, sustained the programme momentum while the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Demonstration & Manufacture programme was re-crafted to support the wider Future Rotorcraft Capability objectives and the subsequent approval process.

The Main Gate Business Case was amended to reflect the impact of Future Rotorcraft Capability and submitted to Investment Approvals Board in September 2005. HM Treasury and Ministerial approval was granted in December 2005 with the Demonstration & Manufacture contract awarded shortly thereafter. The formal approval followed in March 2006.

The programme commenced at the start of 2006 and remains on track and within budget.

The Preliminary Design Review was completed successfully on schedule in January 2008 and the programme is currently focussed on working towards the system Critical Design Review in September 2008. At Main Gate, the Investment Approvals Board acknowledged that the current requirement was for 38 aircraft but only approved the initial procurement of 30. This was to allow wider Future Rotorcraft Capability studies on higher utilisation of aircraft to complete.

A refresh of the operational analysis and the completion of Future Rotorcraft Capability studies has led to a Review Note that will be submitted in the second quarter of 2008 for approval. This will be for the addition of up to an additional 8 aircraft, at an approximate cost of £65m, delivered as part of the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Lockheed Martin Aero

Systems Integration Corporation (Significant (60% by value) sub-contract

with AgustaWestland,

Yeovil</td>
<td>Demonstration and Manufacture</td>
<td>Firm price until 2010, then fixed price subject to Variation of Price</td>
<td>Non-competitive prime but ~60% competition at sub contract level

(across both Prime and AgustaWestland contracts)
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
832
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
840
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-8
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
Delivery of intangible development expenditure now coincides with the first production aircraft delivery. Previously it had been with the fifth aircraft, a year later (-£6m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+1</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>£15m of CDEL funding was brought forward during EP07 which has resulted in a subsequent increase in the Cost of Capital (+£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk and uncertainty allowed for in the 50%
confidence and the approved Not To Exceed figures at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-8</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
122
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2009/2010
</td>
<td>
2010/2011
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>9.6</td>
<td>
9.6
</td>
<td>30</td>
<td>
30
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 76%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
The Operational Capability of the delivered aircraft shall be such that Commander-in-Chief Fleet (advised by Combined Test Team) are able to declare that Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme is ready for operational deployment in the specified roles. A cumulative total of at least 6 Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme aircraft delivered to Royal Naval Air Station (RNAS) Culdrose. Logistic support available to enable the operation and maintenance of all the delivered aircraft. Sufficient Trained personnel to achieve required capability.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
February 2014
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
September 2014
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-7
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-7
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between the risk and uncertainty allowed for in the 50%
confidence and the approved Not To Exceed figures at Main Gate</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
-7
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Type of Cost/Saving
</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th></th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3"></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 11%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>KUR Serial</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Forecast to be Met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>Attack. The user shall be able to neutralise confirmed Anti-submarine Warfare Threats.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>Deployable Search and Rescue (Maritime Only). The user shall be able to conduct naval Search and Rescue.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>Environment. The user shall be able to operate in environments world-wide.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>Find. The user shall be able to acquire situational awareness of the Under Water Effect and Above Water Effect.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>Interoperability. The user shall be able to exchange tactical information between authorities and units.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>Lift. The user shall be able to move personnel and material over land and sea.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>Logistical. The user shall be able to easily logistically support the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>Operational Availability. The user shall be able to have Available Force Elements at a time and place as required to complete the mission.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>09</td>
<td>Operational Locations. The solution shall be able to operate to and from host platforms when required.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10</td>
<td>Survivability. The user shall have force elements capable of surviving in hostile and warfighting environments.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td colspan="3">100 %</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td colspan="3">0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Assessment Phase Following approval of the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Initial Gate Business Case, the Assessment Phase contract was placed on 3rd June 2003. The main Assessment Phase activities comprised:
<ul>
<li>Analysis of the User Requirements and development of a consolidated set of system requirements in the form of a Systems Requirements Document.</li>
<li>Production of System and Sub-System design requirements, and seeking initial costed proposals from potential suppliers.</li>
<li>Conducting trade-off studies to identify the best value solution where options exist.</li>
<li>Developing a coherent plan for Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, aligned to other existing and planned Merlin programmes.</li>
<li>Undertaking Integrated Test, Evaluation and Acceptance planning.</li>
<li>Identification of the risks to the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, and the identification and implementation of mitigation action to reduce the impact to an acceptable level.</li>
<li>Produce documentation and costed proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase.</li>
<li>Undertaking initial Integrated Logistic Support activities to define a solution compliant with the evolving Support Solution Envelope.</li>
</ul>
Future Rotorcraft Capability Review During the Assessment Phase, MoD embarked on a review of all future rotorcraft requirements under the title of the Future Rotorcraft Capability review. The Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Proposal that had been provided by Industry and the associated business case were produced before the impact of the Future Rotorcraft Capability review was known. The Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme was reviewed as part of the wider Future Rotorcraft Capability programme. The Future Rotorcraft Capability programme determined that the balance of financial investment over the first four years of the Equipment Programme between Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme and Future Lynx should be on a 50/50, 30/70, 30/70, 30/70 basis respectively. As a result of this financial rebalancing the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme In-Service Date is 22 months (50% Confidence) later than anticipated and the estimated cost of this delay led to an overall increase in the Equipment Program for Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme of £92m at outturn. To allow Industry to continue critical path activity and to support the reprogramming activities resulting from Future Rotorcraft Capability, the Future Rotorcraft Capability programme provided Transition Phase funding (six months) to the Merlin Integrated Project Team for an extension to the Assessment Phase contract. A further transition phase (six months) was required to again sustain programme momentum, align it with wider Future Rotorcraft Capability requirements and maintain programme viability during the approvals process.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 27[^1]                    | 3%                                                        |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 19[^2]                    | 2%                                                        |
| Variation                     | +8                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
March 2006
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
May 2003
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
34
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>828</td>
<td>837</td>
<td>840</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>928</td>
<td>1007</td>
<td>1092</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
August 2013
</td>
<td>
February 2014
</td>
<td>
February 2016
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
March 2009
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2009
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK

[^1]: Includes the costs for the Assessment Phase and the first Transition Phase

[^2]: Only reflects the Initial Gate approval. It does not reflect the additional scope of work completed under the first approval for Transition Phase. Both elements completed within their approval budgets. Actual approval is £29m
