---
year: 2007.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: NEXT GENERATION LIGHT ANTI-ARMOUR WEAPON (NLAW)
page_from: 93.0
page_to: 100.0
project_label: NEXT GENERATION LIGHT ANTI-ARMOUR WEAPON (NLAW)
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2007_93_100.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

NEXT GENERATION

LIGHT ANTI-ARMOUR

WEAPON (NLAW)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

INFANTRY GUIDED WEAPONS

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon (NLAW) is a man-portable short-range anti-armour weapon to be carried and used by all Arms and Services and replaces the LAW 80 capability. NLAW will provide a predictive line-of sight capability out to a range of 600m, against main battle tanks and light armoured vehicles, when both stationary and manoeuvring, and have the ability to be fired from enclosed spaces and defensive positions. It will have a secondary role as a means of attacking structures. The project is an Enhanced Off-The-Shelf procurement, and includes the provision of training systems and support. The weapon system is being developed in conjunction with the Swedish Defence Material Administration. The NLAW prime contractor is SAAB Bofors Dynamics of Sweden, with Thales Air Defence Ltd as the main UK sub-contractor.

NLAW will be used by all forces operating in the land environment.

Completion of the final design of the NLAW system, and subsequent production, has been delayed as a result of system qualification difficulties. Entry of the system into service has been deferred until at least July 2008.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Saab Bofors Dynamics, Sweden</td>
<td>Full Development and Production</td>
<td>Firm price

(Development Phase) &amp;

Fixed Price (Production)</td>
<td>International competition</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
318
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
415
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-97
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+4
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>+6</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Failure of Design Qualification Tests (DQT) in November 2006 resulted in contractor deferring the start of missile assembly and deliveries in order to conduct further firing trials and repeat DQT. These delays have led to an increase in the Cost of Capital.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
October 2006
</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Reduced risk provision associated with Variation of Price (VOP) and the NLAW warhead qualification trials.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-22</td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</td>
<td>Departmental Review - Reduction in Unit Production Cost as a result of exercise of Swedish Option (-£3m). Reduction in cost of development attributable to collaboration with Sweden (-£9m), VAT saving on Development associated with collaborative approach (-£10m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-39</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Confirmation received from HM Revenue and Customs that NLAW production is collaborative and therefore zero rated for VAT.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-5</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Re-assessment of Training equipment requirements resulting in need to increase procurement of training aids (+£7m). Reduction in scope of Development Phase work, including decisions made to reduce some of the development contract options to reduce costs (-£7m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Date
</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>
Factor
</td>
<td>
Explanation
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Contractual Options added to increase the scope of Development (+£1m). Reduced training equipment quantities needed to meet training capability (-£3m); reduced levels of project support (-£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+4
</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary Priorities
</td>
<td>Changes in timing of spend and Asset Deliveries leading to variations in Cost of Capital (+£1m, +£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-1
</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Prices for Trainer Spares (+£2m), price for Vehicle Kits (+£1m), Price for Combat Weapons (+£1m), Price for Core Development Contract (-£5m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-38
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between risk allowed for in most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
-97
</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</th>
<th>
147
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2007/2008
</td>
<td>
2008/2009
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>0.02</td>
<td></td>
<td>14002</td>
<td>
14002
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
A brigade trained and equipped.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
July 2008
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
July 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+12
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+12
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Failure of DQT in November 2006 resulted in the contractor deferring the start of missile assembly and deliveries in order to conduct further firing trials and repeat DQT.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+8</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Failures in sub-system qualification delayed the start of production with a subsequent impact on In Service Date.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-8</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Maintain Interim Light Anti-Armour

Weapon (ILAW) inservice</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>Nil costs provided ILAW 3 year safe life certified and NLAW ISD achieved</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

NLAW will provide the short range anti-armour capability for all forces operating in the land environment as a replacement for LAW 80. The Interim Light Anti-Armour Weapon (ILAW) was procured under an Urgent Operational Requirement to meet the capability gap created by the early withdrawal of LAW 80. The procurement was scaled for current operations only and presently has a planned Out of Service Date of May-2009. NLAW is being procured for general use (for all arms and services), unlike ILAW which was procured in limited numbers for operations and provides a less effective capability than that which NLAW will deliver.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
NLAW shall be made ready in 10 secs.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
The time to fire for NLAW shall be less than 10 secs.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
The system configured for tactical carriage shall have a mass of not more than 12.5kg
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04 &amp; 05
</td>
<td>
Against a moving target Main Battle Tank target, defined as {x} shall achieve a Single Shot Kill Probability (SSKP) of {y} between 20 and 400m
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06 &amp; 07
</td>
<td>
Against a moving Light Armoured Fighting Vehicle target, defined as
{x} NLAW shall achieve an SSKP of {y} between 20 and 400m
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
NLAW shall be capable of being fired safely from within a room through a window opening. The dimensions of the room shall be 4m x 2.5m x 2.5m (high), the window shall be 1m x 1m located in either the long or short wall and 1m above ground level and the door shall be 0.75m x 2m (high). The firer shall be wearing appropriate in service hearing protection.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td colspan="2">100 %</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The NLAW project predates SMART approvals and as such there was no Initial Gate or Assessment

Phase. Following approval to issue an Invitation To Tender to conduct Project Definition studies in September 1997, and subsequent approval for the Project Definition Phase in July 1999, competitive firm price contracts were awarded in October 1999 to Matra BAe Dynamics in the UK and Celsius in Sweden. The delay between approval to issue the Invitation to Tender and contract award was caused by uncertainty over the future of the Medium Range TRIGAT anti-armour programme, and resulted in slippage to the forecast ISD. The Project Definition Phase contracts lasted up to 22 months and bids for the Demonstration, Manufacture and Support phases were received in January 2001. The contractors were required to confirm the performance of their baseline system, developing weapon enhancements and prototype training systems needed to meet NLAW requirements.

Risk reduction and trade-off studies were undertaken and detailed management, milestone and trials plans produced. The opportunities for collaboration with other countries were explored and an MOU with Sweden, facilitating joint development, was signed in June 2002.

Main Gate Approval to proceed to the Demonstration, Manufacture and Support phases, together with downselection to Saab Bofors Dynamics (formerly part of Celsius), was achieved in May 2002.

Contract placement followed in June 2002.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase cost
</th>
<th>Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Actual Cost</td>
<td>
17
</td>
<td>
5%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
18
</td>
<td>
5%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-1
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
May 2002
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
377
</td>
<td>
415
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
453
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
588
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
August 2006
</td>
<td>
November 2006
</td>
<td>
July 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
May 2004
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
August 2006
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
