---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: A400M
Page_from: 18.0
Page_to: 33.0
Project_label: A400M
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_18_33.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
A400M
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
A400M
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Brigadier John Brittain
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects /
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
A400M
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

A400M is Planned to Provide Tactical and Strategic Mobility to all Three Services. the Required Capabilities Include: Operations from Airfields and Semi-Prepared Rough Landing Areas in Extreme Climates and all Weather Conditions by Day and Night; Carrying a Variety of Equipment Including Vehicles and Troops over Extended Ranges; Air Dropping Paratroops and Equipment; and Being Unloaded with the Minimum of Ground Handling Equipment. the 1998 Strategic Defence Review Confirmed a Requirement for an Airlift Capability to Move Large Single Items Such as Attack Helicopters and some Royal Engineers' Equipment and Concluded that this Would be Met, in the Latter Part of the First Decade of the 21st Century by Future Transport Aircraft. the A400M Was Selected to Meet this Requirement. It will Replace the Remaining Hercules C-130k Fleet.

A400M is a Collaborative Programme Involving Seven European Nations (Belgium, France, Germany, Luxemburg, Spain, Turkey and United Kingdom). the Design Phase is Nearing Completion and Manufacture Activities Have Commenced. Delivery of the First UK Aircraft to the Royal Air Force is Expected in 2014.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Government Announced in December 1994 that it Would Replace Its Aging C-130k Hercules Fleet, in Part by Procuring 25 C-130j's from Lockheed Martin and in Addition, Subject to Certain Conditions, by Rejoining the Next Phase of the Collaborative Future Large Aircraft Programme (Now Known as A400M). the Future Large Aircraft 'Initial Gate' Approval Was Achieved in July 1997 and in the Same Year the Solution Assumed for Costing Purposes Was Changed to an Initial Lease of Four C-17 and Subsequent Procurement of 25 Future Large Aircraft. a Request for Proposals Was Issued to Airbus in September 1997 on Behalf of the Seven Future Large Aircraft Nations (Belgium, France Germany, Italy, Spain, Turkey and UK). Subsequently, in July 1998, Four Nations (Belgium, France, Spain and UK) Issued a "Competitive Request for Proposals" for a Future Transport Aircraft to Airbus Military (A400M), Boeing (C-17) and Lockheed Martin (C-130j).

Proposals Were Received on 29 January 1999 and Parallel National and International Assessments Were Undertaken. These Covered Combined Operational Effectiveness and Investment Appraisal, Technical and Commercial Compliance, Risk Assessment, and an Appraisal of the International Dimensions. This Work also Led to Parallel Negotiations and Clarification with the Three Bidders. at the Direction of the Equipment Approvals Committee in December 1999, Additional Work Was Undertaken to Inform the Main Gate Submission. on 16 May 2000 the Government Announced the Decision to Procure 25 A400M Aircraft to Meet the Future Transport Aircraft Requirement.

## A.3. Project History

On 18 May 2000 the Investment Approvals Board Approved the Acquisition of 25 A400M Aircraft with an

In Service Date of December 2009. Following the Submission of a Review Note, on 8 May 2003 the Investment Approvals Board Revised the in Service Date to December 2011 and Defined it as Being the Delivery of the Seventh UK A400M Aircraft. This Change Was Necessary Due to Delays in the German Parliamentary Approvals Process which Had Prevented Signature of the Multinational Contract; Approval Was Finally Granted on 21 May And, on 27 May 2003, the A400M Development and Production Phase Contract (Including the UK Order for 25 Aircraft) Was Signed by OCCAR on Behalf of the Six Partner Nations.

On 27 May 2006 the Investment Approvals Board Granted Initial Gate Approval and the A400M in Service Support Assessment Phase Commenced.

On 26 June 2008 the First Complete A400M Aircraft Was Rolled Out from the Airbus Military Final Assembly Line Facility in Seville.

On 25 September 2008 Airbus Announced a Delay to the First Flight of the A400M Prototype Aircraft And, on 25 November, Announced that it Could Further Slip until the "Second Half" of 2009. on 27 November, Airbus Military Briefed the A400M Programme Board (the Senior Multinational Governance Body) on Its Progress with Reassessing the Aircraft Delivery Schedule.

On 17 December 2008 the First Flight of the A400M Flying Test Bed (an Adapted C-130 Aircraft) to Undertake Testing of the Specially Designed TP-400 Turbo Prop Engine Developed for A400M Took Place in Cambridge.

On 19 December 2008, Airbus Military Sent a Revised Production Schedule to OCCAR And, on 9 January 2009, Airbus Military Proposed a
"New Approach" to the A400M Programme and Sought Negotiations with Partner Nations.

On 12 March 2009 a Meeting of A400M Partner Nation Defence Ministers (at which the UK Was Represented by the Secretary of State) Agreed to a "Standstill Agreement" with Airbus Military. This Enabled Discussions About Options and Possible Outcomes for the A400M Programme to Take Place Whilst the Rights of all Parties under the Original Contract Were Protected. a Period of Intensive Negotiation, Combined with a Thorough Review of all Aspects of the Programme, then Followed. Enter Text Here

On 11 December 2009 the First Flight of MSN001 (the First A400M Prototype Aircraft) Took Place in Seville.

On 12 March 2010 the Investment Approvals Board Reapproved the UK A400M Programme with a Revised in Service Date of 2015.

On 29 March 2010 in a Written Ministerial Statement the Secretary of State Informed Parliament that Agreement Had Been Reached Between A400M Partner Nations and Airbus Military on the Future of the Programme. Heads of Terms Had Been Agreed that Would Form the Basis for the Negotiation of an Amended Contract (Including the Decision to Amend the UK Order from 25 to 22 Aircraft). on 31 March 2010 the Heads of Terms Were Signed on Behalf of Partner Nations by OCCAR with Airbus Military.

On 8 April 2010 the First Flight of MSN002 (the Second Prototype Aircraft) Took Place in Seville, Followed on 9 July 2010 by the First Flight of MSN003 (the Third Prototype), also in Seville.

On 19 October 2010 the Strategic Defence and Security Review Announcement Stated that A400M Would be a Key Element of the RAF Future Air Transport Fleet. It also Announced the Bringing Forward of the Hercules C-130j Out of Service Date from 2030 to 2022.

On 5 November 2010 the Substantive Contract Amendment (which Included Revised Aircraft Production and Delivery Schedules) Was Agreed by Partner Nations' Representatives and Sent for National Staffing and Approval Prior to Signature. the UK Had Already Achieved Reapproval in March.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Following the Signature of the Amended Design and Production Phase Contract on 7 April 2011, the Revised Aircraft Production and Delivery Schedules Remain on Track. Programme and Project Review Meetings (Held on a Quarterly Basis) at which Airbus Military Present Details of the Current Programme Status and Forthcoming Activities to Partner Nations and OCCAR, Indicate that Steady Progress Continues to be Made.

Investigation Work into the Causes of Engine Problems Encountered in June 2011 During Flight Trials Have Concluded and Solutions Have Been Developed. Although this Caused some Disruption to the Flight Trials Programme, this is not Expected to Have a Significant Impact on the Aircraft Production Schedule.

Although the A400M is a Military Transport Aircraft, Its Design will be Predominantly Civil Certified, with Additional Military Certification as Necessary. with the Exception of Long Distance Endurance Flying, all Flight Trials Associated with the Initial Type Certificate Clearance Were Completed by the End of March 2012. the Evidence Produced by These Trials Has Been Evaluated by the European Aviation Safety Agency and a Restricted Type Certificate Was Granted in Late April 2012.

The First Flight of MSN006 (the Fifth and Final Prototype Aircraft) Took Place on 20 December 2011. Together the Trials Fleet Had Amassed 2944 Flying Hours and 1002 Test Flights by 25 March 2012.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Not Proceeding with this Capability Would Significantly Reduce the UK's Tactical Air Transport Capability Due to Having to Rely Solely on C-130j Aircraft to Provide Support to Operations after the C-130k Out of Service Date in 2013. Furthermore, not Proceeding Would Mean that the UK will not Have any Tactical Air Transport Capability after 2022, (the Revised Out of Service Date for the C-130j Declared in the Strategic Defence and Security Review) and less than the Planned for Strategic Lift Capability, as it Would be Dependant Solely on the Current Fleet of Seven (which will Increase to Eight when an Additional Aircraft is Delivered in May 2012) C-17 Aircraft.

The Achievement of Restricted Type Certificate Has Significantly Derisked the Programme, and is a Major Step Towards Achieving a Deliverable Aircraft. Future Capability Risks Include the Ongoing Development of Military Functionality, the Delivery of an Appropriate Support Solution and the Provision of Trained Crews to Match Aircraft Deliveries. These Risks are Well Understood and Work is Ongoing to Undertake Effective Mitigation Activity.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>airbus Military

Sociedad Limitada
</Td>
<td>development, Production and Initial in Service Support.</Td>
<td>
Fixed Price, Subject to Variation of Price (VOP)
</Td>
<td>competitive -
International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4"></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">
An Assessment Phase for the Support Strategy is Currently Underway.

Enter Text Here</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>0.06%</Td>
<td>0.03%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>0.06%</Td>
<td>0.03%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
2498
</Td>
<td>
2614
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>2498</Td>
<td>3268</Td>
<td>+770</Td>
<td>+163</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>2498</Td>
<td>3268</Td>
<td>+770</Td>
<td>+163</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 A400M

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>
-8
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>a Reduction Due to Repricing.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>
-10
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduced Defensive Aids Hardware Device Procurement Following the Drawdown of Other Aircraft Platforms in the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>changes to Integtration Contingency</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increased Cost of OCCAR Management Agency</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+7</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>revised Costing for Assumed Set Up Costs for the A400M Training Facility Including Increased VAT
£5m</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>march 2012</Th>
<th>+3</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>increased Cost of Integrating Equipments to the A400M Platform. (-£2.7m) DASS,
£2.5m) Mission Planning System, Technical Support (£3.1m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>july 2011</Td>
<td>+175</Td>
<td>procurement Processes -
International Collaboration</Td>
<td>uk Contribution to the Multinational Export Levy Facility Provided to EADS by A400M Partner Nations.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>a Planning Round 2011 Option to Swap an Early Delivery Aircraft with One Due to be Delivered Later to Ensure that the Whole Fleet Has the Same Specification.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>procurement Processes -
International Collaboration</Td>
<td>a Planning Round 2011 Option to Reprofile Payments to Align Them with the Revised Delivery Schedule Agreed in the Six Nation International Collaborative Contract () and Associated Risk ().</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>procurement Processes -
International Collaboration</Td>
<td>a Change Due to a Realignment of Payments with the Revised Programme Schedule Agreed in the Six Nation International</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>foreign Exchange Increases Due to Changes in Planning Assumptions.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>an Increase Due to Changes in Inflation Assumptions in the 2011 Planning Round.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>increase in Estimated Cost of Supplier Network Installations for the Spares Ordering System.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>a Reprofiling of Initial Support Spares to Align with the Revised Aircraft Delivery Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Indirect RDEL (Foreign Exchange) in Accordance with a Change in Departmental Policy.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>

</Th>
<th>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Th>
<th>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>an in Year Gain Due to the Increase in the Value of £ vs € Due to the Difference Between the Set Planning Exchange Rate and Actual Outturn.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>a Reduction in the Need to Use the International Training Centre Facilities Due to Programme Delays.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes -
International Collaboration
</Td>
<td>a Change Due to Programme Rebalancing as a Result of Work Undertaken in Support of Concluding an Amended Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>loss Due to the Difference Between the Set Planning Exchange Rate and Forecast Outturn.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>revised Costing for Mission Planning System Due to Change from Acquisition Only to also Include Support.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increase Due to the Reassessment of the Need for Capital Spares (Two Long Deployment Kits)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>a Loss in 2008/2009 Due to the Fall in Value of £ vs €</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>a Reduction in the Need to Use the International Training Centre Facilities Due to Programme Delays.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>an Increase on Payments for the Training Service</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>inclusion of VAT on Payments for Training Service</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increase Due to the Reassessment of the Need for Capital Spares.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>portable Removable on-Board Inert Gas Generation System Fuel Tank Inerting System.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>inflation</Th>
<th>an Increase Based on Latest Delivery Schedule.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>increase Due to a Revised Estimate of the Cost of Training</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>an Increase in 2008/2009</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>inclusion of Additional Airworthiness Support to Cover Aircraft Release to Service.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>variation in 2008/2009</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>an Increase in 2008/2009.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>reintroduction of One Training Simulator.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-94</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>departmental Reviews Have Identified Savings to Programme Risks (-£23m). Changed Delivery Profile from that in the Business Case (-£61m). Minor Realism Adjustments, Includes UK Share of Organisation Conjointe De Coopération en Matière d'ARmement (OCCAR) Programme Division Costs (+£5m), QinetiQ Support Costs Increased (+£1m), Unidentified Variance (+£1m). Equipment Programme Measure Deleting 1 Simulator (-£20m). Minor Realism Changes Includes Certification, Special to Type Equipment and Training Facilities (+£7m). Realism Reprofile of Development Production Phase Contract Together with Directed Infra-Red Counter Measures and Cargo Hold Mock-Up Costs (£4m)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-355</Th>
<th>changed Capability Requirements</Th>
<th>defer UK A400M National Training Facility by 2 Years (-
£2m). Fuel Tank Inertion System Pipe Work (+£6m). Deletion of Centralised Crypto Management Unit Requirement (-£12m). Deletion of Civil Pallets Configuration Item (-£5m). Addition of Propeller Brake (+£6m). Option to Re-Profile Training Facilities for Realism(£1m). Programme Measure to Move Deferred Configuration Items Back into Aircraft Delivery Profile (-£2m). Reduction in Number of Aircraft to be Equipped with Defensive Aids Sub-System from 25 to 9 (£238m). Programme Option to Delete and Defer Configuration Items and to Slip in Service Date by 12 Months. (-£81m). Option Bringing the Defensive Aids SubSystem Forward Onto Aircraft 1-9 (+£9m). Delay of Programme by 9 Months (-£12m) Deletion of One Training Simulator (-£23m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+353</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>realism to Reflect 3 Month Delay in 2000/01 to Contract Effectivity (+£52m). Slip of Aircraft Payments and Associated Equipment to Reflect above Contract Let Decision (+£15m). Improved Costing Data for Configuration Items Available (+£160m). Contract Effectivity Date Slipped from November 2001 - October 2002 (+£149m). Contract Effectivity Date Slipped from October 2002 - April 2003 (£59m). Adjustments in Line with Increased Knowledge of Programme (+£66m). Contract Effectivity Date Slipped from April 2003 - May 2003, Includes Redefinition of Asset Deliveries to Align with Aircraft Delivery Schedule (-£30m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-10</Th>
<th>exchange Rate</Th>
<th>a Decrease in 2005/2006 (£24m). Variation in 2004/2005 (+£39m). Variation in Exchange Rate Assumptions Used in the Business Case, 2000/2001, 2001/2002 and 2002/2003 (£232m). Variation in 2003/04 (+£222m). Exchange Rate Changes (-£15m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>an Increase in 2005/2006 (+£14m). an Increase in 2004/2005 (+£8m). Changes Between Inflation Rate Assumed in the Business Case and Yearly Inflation Indices Resulting in a Decrease 2000/2001 (-£6m), an Increase 2001/2002 (+£6m), a Decrease 2002/2003 (-£10m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+65</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>total Number of Aircraft Ordered by Participating Nations Higher than Anticipated, and Consequent Reduction in Unit Production Cost (-£65m). Subsequent Contract Renegotiation Due to German Reduction in Off Take (+£130m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+34</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increase in Training Costs, Figures from Industry Indicated a Shortfall in Costing Line (+£32m). Realism Decrease to Support Activities Post Aircraft Delivery (£3m). Programme Realism with Regard to Costing Technical Publications (-£5m), Special to Type Equipment (-£5m), Aircraft Ground Equipment (-£4m), Government Furnished Equipment/Facilities (-£7m) and Codification of Equipment/Spares (-£1m). Training Needs Analysis Identified the Need for Funding Increase; Develop &amp; Build Facilities (+£11m), Initial Training (+£7m), Develop &amp; Build Training Devices (+£6m), and Develop &amp; Build Training Facilities (-£3m). Identification of UK Only Certification Requirements (+£6m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+50</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>costing Realism in Line with Better Programme Understanding Including Adjustment for Actual Sunk Costs (-£6m). Costing Readjusted with Understanding of Future Programme – Certification (-£15m), Government Furnished Equipment (+£4m), Support (+£4m). Re-Profiling Deliveries for Realism Build Facilities (£1m), Initial Provision Spares (£5m), Deployment Kits (-£1m). Reduction in the Requirement for Government Procured Items (£46m). Improved Understanding of Programme Requirement for Initial Provision Spares (+£83m), Deployment Kits (-£1m), Initial Training (-£13m) and Mission Planning &amp; Restitution System (£10m) Growth in Estimates for Training and Government Furnished Facilities (+£57m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+770</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
FALSE
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 66%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>869</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>883</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>870</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>884</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

A400M

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment Decision

Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>
July 1997
</Td>
<td>
May 2000
</Td>
<td>
34
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
February 2009
</Td>
<td>
December 2009
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>in-Service Date Defined as Delivery of the Seventh Aircraft with Military Aircraft Release and Support Arrangements.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>february 2009</Td>
<td>march 2015</Td>
<td>+73</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 A400M

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>procurement Processes - International Collaboration</Td>
<td>a Change Due to Programme Rebalancing.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>updated Programme Estimate Based Upon A400M Task Force Outputs and Air Support Cluster Assessment.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>updated Programme Proposal Received from Airbus Military, Including Revised Production Approach.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>programme Delays Affecting Engine and Aircraft First Flight.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Latest Delay and Risk Assessment Beyond First Flight.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+9</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>contractor Delay to Aircraft Delivery.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+16</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>change in the Customer's Requirement Flowing from Changed Budgetary Priorities.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+9</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>delay in Bringing Contract into Effect as a Result of Delayed Approvals in Germany.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+73</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

A400M

A400M

## C.3.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+41</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the Department Has Extended the Service Life of the Hercules C-130k until the End of 2012.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">total</Td>
<td>41</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>the Revised Forecast A400M in Service Date No Longer Aligns with the C-130k Out of Service Date of 2013. This Increases the Pressure on Existing Tactical Airlift Capability from 2013 to 2015. Interim Measures to Mitigate this Include Action to Increase the Availability of the Remaining C-130j Fleet.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

A400M

A400M

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>last Years Score</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
80% GREEN
</Td>
<td>
70% AMBER
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>22 A400M Aircraft, Mission Planning and Ground Support Systems</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>uk A400M Training Solution, Including Interim Use of the International Training</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td><sup>c</sup>In-Service Support Contract.<sup>t i S Ill</Sup></Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>a400m Infrastructure Projects, Including an Electronic Warfare Facility at RAF</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>formation of Squadrons and Related <sup>w Ddi t D</Sup>
Service Pesonnel</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>agreed Capability Milestones, Including Aerial Delivery and Tactical Operation Concepts.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>a400m is Being Overseen by Strategic Mobility (Air) Project Board
&amp; Future Brize Project Board.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>integration of the Mission Planning (Including Electronic Warfare) and Ground Support Systems into Wider MOD Operational and Logistic Support Structures.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (3)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects that the Amended Contract Includes Revised Aircraft Production and Delivery Schedules.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects that the Training Service Assessment Phase is Still Underway.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Potential Impact of the Rebaselined Programme, and that an Amended Contract is Still to be Concluded.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Potential Impact of Depth Maintenance Facility Risk on Delivery of Logistic Support Solution.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects that the Support Assessment Phase is Still Underway.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>updated Programme Proposal Received from Airbus Military, Including Revised Production Approach.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Latest Delay and the Wider Future Brize Norton Study.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

A400M

A400M

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 A400M

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1,2,6,8</Td>
<td>deployment Capability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>payload.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>environmental Operating Envelope.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1,6</Td>
<td>tactical Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>1,6,8</Td>
<td>navigation Performance.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>communication System.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>defensive Aids Suite.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>1,2,6</Td>
<td>aerial Delivery.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>2,5,7</Td>
<td>crew Composition.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.4. Support Contract

A400M
