---
year: 2008.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: SEARCH AND RESCUE HELICOPTER
page_from: 217.0
page_to: 218.0
project_label: Search and Rescue Helicopter
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2008_217_218.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

SEARCH AND RESCUE

HELICOPTER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

SEARCH AND RESCUE - HELICOPTER

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Air and Littoral Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

Search and Rescue - Helicopter is a joint Ministry of Defence and Maritime and Coastguard Agency (an Agency of the Department for Transport) programme. It seeks to replace the current Search and Rescue capability, provided around the UK (and potentially the Falkland Islands) by the Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy, using Sea King helicopters, and through the Maritime and Coastguard Agency service contract.

It is planned to introduce the new service progressively in the next decade, when the Maritime and Coastguard Agency contract expires and the Sea Kings come to the end of their planned lives. Following Ministry of Defence and Department for Transport Ministerial approvals to enter Assessment Phase 2, a competition under the Private Finance Initiative, was launched in May 2006 under European Union procurement regulations using the competitive dialogue process.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e Main gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Search and Rescue - Helicopter Assessment Phase was approved in 2 Phases – Assessment Phase 1 and Assessment Phase 2. Assesment Phase 1 considered the range of procurement options as outlined in the Search and Rescue - Helicopter Initial Gate approval, resulting in a recommendation for a joint Ministry of Defence/Maritime and Coastguard Agency competitive

211

Private Finance Initiative procurement strategy.

Ministry of Defence Ministerial approval for Assessment Phase 2 to implement the joint Ministry of Defence/Maritime and Coastguard Agency competitive Private Finance Initiative procurement strategy was gained via the Future Rotorcraft Capability Initial Gate Business Case and followed by Department for Transport Minister approval of a parallel Business Case.

A joint Ministerial announcement of the Private Finance Initiative Procurement Strategy was made in May 2006 and the competition was launched through the Official Journal of the European Union. Four consortia were down selected following assessment of their Pre

Qualification Questionnaires in November 2006: AgustaWestland; CHC Scotia Ltd/Thales UK

Ltd (now known as “Soteria”); AIRKNIGHTTEAM (Lockheed Martin UK Ltd/VT Group

Ltd/British International Helicopters Ltd); and UK Air Rescue (Bristow Helicopters Ltd/FBH

Ltd/Serco Ltd). The Competitive Dialogue with industry formally commenced in February 2007. In October 2007 Augusta Westland withdrew as an independent participant from the competition. Westland Helicopters Ltd was subsequently admitted to the UK Air Rescue consortium in January 2008 following the submission of a Pre Qualification Questionnaire addendum . Industry’s costed solutions for the first round of bidding were submitted in January 2008. Evaluation is ongoing. It is anticipated that Assessment Phase 2 will conclude with the recommendation of a preferred bidder.

The combined Ministry of Defence/Maritime and Coastguard Agency forecast cost of the Assessment Phase is £14m and the total cost of the project is estimated to be between £3bn and £5bn (Figures at tables 2b and 2d relate to Ministry of Defence costs only).

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
11<sup></sup>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
1†
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+10
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Latest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Represents the planned commencement of the service at the first Ministry of Defence location.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Represents the Ministry of Defence Equipment Plan contribution to the Private Finance Initiative unitary charge.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\ Represents total forecast cost for Assessment Phase 1 and Assessment Phase 2. Assessment Phase 1 approval £1.3m, Assessment Phase 1 actual spend £0.4m. Assessment Phase 2 Approval £9.9m, total forecast spend £10.8m.

† Approval for Assessment Phase 1 only.

212
