---
year: 2007.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: FUTURE INTEGRATED SOLDIER TECHNOLOGY (FIST)
page_from: 181.0
page_to: 182.0
project_label: Future Integrated Soldier Technology
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2007_181_182.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE INTEGRATED

SOLDIER TECHNOLOGY

(FIST)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

DISMOUNTED CLOSE COMBAT

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

The Future Integrated Soldier Technology (FIST) programme aims to integrate both current and emerging key technologies that British dismounted soldiers require for them to maintain their position in the forefront of capability. The programme will ensure the future soldier has equipment that optimises effectiveness, reduces physical and psychological load, and minimises the effects of combat stress and the risks of human error.

Historically, soldiers have been equipped in a piecemeal manner. FIST will consider the dismounted soldier as a system, and the eight-man section as a virtual platform. This ‘system of systems’ approach, demonstrated successfully during the Concept Phase, will fundamentally improve the capabilities of troops engaged in dismounted close combat. FIST will deliver an integrated suite of equipment encompassing the NATO domains of C4I (Command, Control, Communications, Computers and

Information), lethality, mobility, survivability and sustainability.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e Main Gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Initial Gate approval was achieved in August 2001. Four companies submitted tenders for the Assessment Phase (AP) prime contract, and a two-stage selection process was adopted (four to two and two to one). Two companies were de-selected in August 2002, leaving BAE Systems and Thales Defence Ltd to take part in a competitive planning phase between August 2002 and January 2003. The selection of Thales Defence Ltd as the FIST AP prime contractor was announced on 12 March 2003.

The AP prime contract was expected to take 32 months, but commitment of troops to operations overseas delayed critical trials planned for Summer 2004, leading to an extension of three months and

175

a cost increase of £2.5m. Problems were encountered on a subsequent major trial held in Autumn 2005, as some systems proved insufficiently robust to allow adequate data to be collected.

Consequently, more time is needed to mature our understanding of the requirement and of the final technical solution. The AP has therefore been extended and a further contract placed with Thales to cover the period up to 31 July 2007. The estimate of the cost of the AP has been increased to £36m. In view of the insufficient technological maturity of some parts of the FIST equipment that was trialled, it is now our intention to adopt an incremental acquisition strategy based on a series of Main Gate approvals. This will enable elements of FIST capability to enter service as and when they are ready.

Successful Combined Operational Effectiveness and Investment Appraisal trials have taken place in the last year, and have produced the required data to inform the FIST Main Gate Business Case.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
36
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
26
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+10
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Latest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">The FIST project is intended to provide dismounted soldiers with an integrated suite of equipment that optimises their effectiveness on the battlefield. Soldiers have hitherto been equipped in a piecemeal manner, but FIST will regard the individual soldier as a system. A series of Main Gate Business Cases will be submitted for approval as elements of the work currently being carried out in the AP reach maturity. The Main Gate Business Cases will seek approval for demonstration and production of a range of equipment to deliver the required capability.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

176
