---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate
Project: NEXT GENERATION LIGHT ANTI-ARMOUR WEAPON
Page_from: 95.0
Page_to: 102.0
Project_label: NEXT GENERATION LIGHT ANTI-ARMOUR WEAPON (NLAW)
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_95_102.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

NEXT GENERATION

LIGHT ANTI-ARMOUR WEAPON

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

INFANTRY GUIDED WEAPONS

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project Description, Progress and Key Future Events

Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon is a Man-Portable Short-Range Anti-Armour Weapon to be Carried and Used by all Arms and Services and Replaces the Light Anti-Armour Weapon 80 Capability. Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon will Provide a Predictive Line-of-Sight Capability Out to a Range of 600m, Against Main Battle Tanks and Light Armoured Vehicles, when both Stationary and Manoeuvring, and Have the Ability to be Fired from Enclosed Spaces and Defensive Positions. It will Have a Secondary Role as a Means of Attacking Structures. the Project is an Enhanced Off-the-Shelf Procurement, and Includes the Provision of Training Systems and Support. the Weapon System is Being Developed in Conjunction with the Swedish Defence Material Administration. the Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Prime Contractor is SAAB Bofors Dynamics of Sweden, with Thales Air Defence Ltd as the Main UK Subcontractor.

Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon will be Used by all Forces Operating in the Land Environment.

The in Service Date for the Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon System Has Been Delayed as a Result of System Qualification Difficulties.

## 1b. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">critical to Achievement of ISD</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 1c. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>contractor(s)</Th>
<th>contract Scope</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>saab Bofors Dynamics, Sweden</Td>
<td>full Development and Production</Td>
<td>firm Price

(Development Phase)

&amp; Fixed Price (Production)</Td>
<td>international Competition</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance Against Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
310
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
415
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-105
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
-8
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Reasons for Variation from Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>
Reduction in Overall Missile Numbers.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>january 2008</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>receipts</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>january 2008</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>
Changes in Timing of Spend and Asset Deliveries Leading to Variations in Cost of Capital.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>january 2008</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>procurement Strategy</Td>
<td>
Identification of an Alternative to Meet the Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Dummy Round Requirement using Internal MoD Resources.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>september 2007</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>
Inflation Against Index Used for Next Generation Light AntiArmour Weapon Programme Lower than Previously Forecast.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-39</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>
Confirmation Received from HM Revenue and Customs that Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Production is Collaborative and Therefore Zero Rated for VAT.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>
Changes in Timing of Spend and Asset Deliveries Leading to Variations in Cost of Capital (+£1m, +£3m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>
Prices for Trainer Spares (+£2m), Price for Vehicle Kits (+£1m), Price for Combat Weapons (+£1m), Price for Core Development Contract (-£5m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-22</Td>
<td>procurement</Td>
<td>
Departmental Review - Reduction
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>factor</Td>
<td>explanation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>strategy</Td>
<td>in Unit Production Cost as a Result of Exercise of Swedish Option (-£3m). Reduction in Cost of Development Attributable to Collaboration with Sweden (-£9m), VAT Saving on Development Associated with Collaborative Approach (-£10m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>failure of Design Qualification Tests in November 2006 Resulted in Contractor Deferring the Start of Missile Assembly and Deliveries in Order to Conduct Further Firing Trials and Repeat Design Qualification Tests. These Delays Have Led to an Increase in the Cost of Capital (+£6m). Reduced Risk Provision Associated with Variation of Price and the Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Warhead Qualification Trials (-£2m). Re-Assessment of Training Equipment Requirements Resulting in Need to Increase Procurement of Training Aids (+£7m). Reduction in Scope of Development Phase Work, Including Decisions Made to Reduce some of the Development Contract Options to Reduce Costs (-£7m). Contractual Options Added to Increase the Scope of Development (+£1m). Reduced Training Equipment Quantities Needed to Meet Training Capability (-£3m);
Reduced Levels of Project Support (-£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-38</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>difference Between Risk Allowed for in Most Likely (50%) and Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-105</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</Th>
<th>
196
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of Peak Procurement Expenditure</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2006/2007
</Td>
<td>
2007/2008
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2e. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">unit Production Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>current</Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Current
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>0.02</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>14002</Td>
<td>
13669
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 78%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>isd Definition:</Th>
<th>
A Brigade Trained and Equipped.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3b. Performance Against Approved in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast ISD</Td>
<td>
April 2009
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
July 2007
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation (Months)</Td>
<td>
+21
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
+9
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3c. Reasons for Variation from Approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2008
</Td>
<td>
-6
</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>reduction in the Number of Weapons Required to Achieve ISD.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
January 2008
</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>further Problems with Final Design Qualification Resulted in the Need for Additional Iterations of System Design Testing to Achieve Reliability Requirements.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
October 2007
</Td>
<td>
+9
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>slippage of Forecast in Service Date to April 2009 as a Result of Continued Problems with Final Design Qualification.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+20
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>failure of Design Qualification Tests in November 2006 Resulted in the Contractor Deferring the Start of Missile Assembly and Deliveries in Order to Conduct Further Firing Trials and Repeat Design Qualification Tests (+12 Months). Failures in Sub-System Qualification Delayed the Start of Production with a Subsequent Impact on in Service Date (+8 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-8
</Td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</Td>
<td>
+21
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3d. Cost Resulting from ISD Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>type of Cost/Saving</Th>
<th>
Cost £m
</Th>
<th>saving £m</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Maintain Interim Light Anti-Armour Weapon in-Service
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3e. Operational Impact of ISD Variation

The Short Range Anti-Armour Capability in Current Operations is Provided by the Interim Light Anti-Armour Weapon Procured under an Urgent Operational Requirement in 2005 to Meet the Capability Gap Created by the Early Withdrawal of Light Anti-Armour Weapon 80. the Delay in the in Service Date of the more Capable Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon System Has Had Virtually No Impact on Current Operations Because There is No Heavy Armour Threat. However, There Would be an Impact in the Unlikely Event of a Requirement for a Short Range Capability Against Modern Heavy Armour Before the Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon ISD in April 2009.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance Against Approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>forecast to be

Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>
Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Shall be Made Ready in 10 Secs.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</Td>
<td>
The Time to Fire for Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Shall be less than 10 Secs.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</Td>
<td>
The System Configured for Tactical Carriage Shall Have a Mass of not more than 12.5kg
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
04 &amp; 05
</Td>
<td>
Against a Moving Target Main Battle Tank Target, Defined as {x} Shall Achieve a Single Shot Kill Probability of {y} Between 20 and 400m
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
06 &amp; 07
</Td>
<td>
Against a Moving Light Armoured Fighting Vehicle Target, Defined as {x}, Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Shall Achieve a Single Shot Kill Probability of {y} Between 20 and 400m
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</Td>
<td>
Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Shall be Capable of Being Fired Safely from Within a Room Through a Window Opening. the Dimensions of the Room Shall be 4m x 2.5m x 2.5m (High), the Window Shall be 1m x 1m Located in Either the Long or Short Wall and 1m above Ground Level and the Door Shall be 0.75m x 2m (High). the Firer Shall be Wearing Appropriate in Service Hearing Protection.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
100 %
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 4b. Reasons for Variation Against Approved Key Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Next Generation Light Anti-Armour Weapon Project Predates SMART Approvals and as Such There Was No Initial Gate or Assessment Phase. Following Approval to Issue an Invitation to Tender to Conduct Project Definition Studies in September 1997, and Subsequent Approval for the Project Definition Phase in July 1999, Competitive Firm Price Contracts Were Awarded in October 1999 to Matra BAe Dynamics in the UK and Celsius in Sweden. the Delay Between Approval to Issue the Invitation to Tender and Contract Award Was Caused by Uncertainty over the Future of the Medium Range TRIGAT Anti-Armour Programme, and Resulted in Slippage to the Forecast ISD. the Project Definition Phase Contracts Lasted Up to 22 Months and Bids for the Demonstration, Manufacture and Support Phases Were Received in January 2001. the Contractors Were Required to Confirm the Performance of their Baseline System, Developing Weapon Enhancements and Prototype Training Systems Needed to Meet Next Generation Light AntiArmour Weapon Requirements.

Risk Reduction and Trade-Off Studies Were Undertaken and Detailed Management, Milestone and Trials Plans Produced. the Opportunities for Collaboration with Other Countries Were Explored and a Memorandum of Understanding with Sweden, Facilitating Joint Development, Was Signed in June 2002.

Main Gate Approval to Proceed to the Demonstration, Manufacture and Support Phases, Together with Downselection to Saab Bofors Dynamics (Formerly Part of Celsius), Was Achieved in May 2002. Contract Placement Followed in June 2002.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (Outturn Prices)       | Assessment Phase Cost | Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement Expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 17                        | 5%                                                        |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 18                        | 5%                                                        |
| Variation                     | -1                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
</Colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>date of Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
May 2002
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date of Initial Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>length of Assessment Phase [months]</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5d. Cost Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (Outturn Prices)</Th>
<th>lowest</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>highest</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Forecast at Main Gate</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>377</Td>
<td>415</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>expected Envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>453</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>588</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5e. ISD Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>earliest</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>latest Acceptable</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
August 2006
</Td>
<td>
November 2006
</Td>
<td>july 2007</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability Was Expected to be Available at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>may 2004</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
August 2006
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
