---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: FUTURE JOINT COMBAT AIRCRAFT
page_from: 51.0
page_to: 60.0
project_label: Joint Combat Aircraft (Lightning II)
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_51_60.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE JOINT COMBAT AIRCRAFT

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

JOINT COMBAT AIRCRAFT

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Carrier Strike

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Following UK participation in the Concept Demonstration Phase of the programme, the US

Joint Strike Fighter was selected to meet the Joint Combat Aircraft requirement. The Strategic

Defence Review confirmed this requirement to provide the Joint Force 2000 (joint command for Harrier Forces) with a multi-role fighter/attack aircraft to replace the Royal Navy Sea Harrier and the Royal Air Force Harrier GR7/9. A tailored Main Gate Demonstration approval was obtained in January 2001 for participation in the System Development and Demonstration phase to the value of £1.3bn, along with
£600m for related non-System Development and

Demonstration work, leading to signature that month by UK and US governments of the System

Development and Demonstration Memorandum of Understanding. The selection of Lockheed

Martin as the Joint Strike Fighter air system prime contractor included a teaming agreement with Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems to collectively form Team Joint Strike Fighter. Two separate and competitive propulsion contracts were awarded to Pratt and Witney for the F135 engine and GE/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team for the F136 engine. Whilst other partners joined the programme at Level 2 and 3 entry arrangements, only US and UK requirements drive the System Development and Demonstration baseline solution.

In September 2002 the UK selected the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Joint Strike Fighter variant to meet our requirement. A review of the Joint Strike Fighter Programme and the viability of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design was completed in January 2005 and concluded that a successful programme of weight reduction initiatives and other performance enhancements had restored confidence that the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design should remain the UK’s planning assumption. A further review by the Investment Approvals Board in July 2006 confirmed this decision.

On 12 December 2006 Minister of State for Defence Equipment and Support signed the Production Sustainment and Follow-on Development Memorandum of Understanding, reporting of this phase will commence in MPR09 when the UK plan to purchase the first aircraft, allowing the UK to continue to influence all aspects of the Joint Strike Fighter programme as it moves into a new phase.

The flight test programme commenced on 15 December 2006 with the successful first flight of the first Conventional Take-Off and Land aircraft. The first Short Take Off and Vertical Landing aircraft is currently planned to fly in Summer 2008. Continued participation in the Joint Strike Fighter programme will deliver a Block 3 aircraft with Air-to-Air and Air-to-Ground capabilities to the UK.

Two Key User Requirements remain at risk:

KUR04 - Mission Performance: In July 2006 the Investment Approvals Board directed that Ship-borne Rolling and Vertical Landing should be included in future development of the Joint Combat Aircraft design to mitigate the risk to the Vertical Land Bring Back capability.

KUR06 – Logistic Footprint: Performance remains marginally better than requirement, although due to very narrow margin this KUR remains at risk. Work is ongoing with Lockheed Martin to drive down Logistic Footprint to ensure it remains within specification as the air system matures throughout the System Development and Demonstration phase.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Initial Gate Requirement</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Aircraft Carrier
</td>
<td>The ISD for this project will be set when it achieves its Main Gate approval</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Lockheed Martin</td>
<td>System Development and Demonstration</td>
<td>Cost plus award fee, subject to a maximum price.</td>
<td>Competitive International collaboration procurement. UK

participation through

Memorandum of

Understanding agreement. (Note: the contract is placed by the US Department of

Defense with Lockheed Martin.)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
1834
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
2236
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-402
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-24
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>-18</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>System Development and Demonstration contribution against MPR07 Versus MPR08 Exchange rate: 2007/08 (-£12m), 2008/09 to 2013/14 (-£6m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>In year out turn against forecast – including minor changes for 2007/08 (-£14m). UK non System Development and Demonstration National work; : Changes to reflect realism: UK Precision Guided Bomb (-£7m), Carrier Variant Future integration (+£1m) and Operational Test and Evaluation (-£7m). Maturation of risk identified since Equipment Plan 07: Autonomic Logistic Information System (+£5m), Conformity European markings (+£6m), Re-assessment of risk (+£6m). Re-assessment of Main programme expenditure: Mission Support (+£2m), Reprogramming (+£10m), Bowman (+£4m). Planning Round 08 Option not included in Equipment Plan07 (-£7m). Cost of Capital charge as a result of above realignment (-£5m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>MPR07: The Integrated Project Team conducted a review of the project work schedule which has given the team sufficient certainty to include more accurate accruals for the duration of the project (-£10m). Accounting Adjustment made in MPR06 now reflected in re-profiling of programme (-£2m). Interest on capital correction (MPR02
+£46m;</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>MPR03 -£12m). New Defence Procurement Agency requirement to include Price Forecasting Group costs within the equipment plan (+£1m). Additional interest on capital from new Defence Procurement Agency IT accrual methodology (+£1m). Accounting reclassification of feasibility studies (-£2m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£16m). MPR06: Change of accounting treatment for System Development and Demonstration contributions (+£19m), re-profile of 2005/06 accrual into later years (-£18m). Removal of 2005/06 accrual, reconciliation of accrual (+£1m). MPR05: Re profiling of UK specific tasks (+£3m). Adjustment of treatment of Cost of Capital Charges calculation (+£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+286</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>MPR07: Re-assessment of UK National Work -
attributable cost which include: UK integration costs:
(-£94m), Block 3 weapons adjusted to reflect the latest costing from Prime contractor (+£7m), Safety Case now defined to prepare for contract placement in 2007/08 (+£11m) and reassessment of risk provision (-£87m). Break out from reassessment from risk provision above which are: UK basing integration &amp; testing (+£5m), Identification of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation costs (+£26m). Outturn for 2006/07 versus Forecast (-£6m). Increase in Cost of Capital Charge resulting from change of planning assumption on delivery of Intangible assets (+£48m). Adjustment for realism in the cost of the UK non- System Development and Demonstration work resulting from a deeper review of the estimates originally provided by the US (+£43m). Fewer UK</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>studies than originally planned (MPR02 -£1m; MPR03 -£6m). Costs benefits gained from use of existing Advance Short Range Air to Air Missile stocks for Joint Combat Aircraft trials (-£6m). Fewer weapon studies undertaken in year (-£1m). Improved project support strategy (-£3m). Better understanding of the integrated nature and requirements of the aircraft systems (+£384m). MPR06: Re-profile of UK National Work to mitigate increase in Exchange Rate. Main Drivers are Interoperability (-£1m), Capital Studies (-£1m), UK Integrated Helmet Mounted Display System (-£1m) and Carrier Vessel Future Integration (-£3m). Re-profile of later years Follow on Development (-£3m).MPR05: Reassessment of Dstl &amp; QinetiQ tasking (-£10m). Correction of contingency estimates due to weight risks in MPR04 (-£15m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-499</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>MPR06: Reviews of the external missile systems for Joint Combat Aircraft resulted in the removal of the requirement for integrating externally mounted Brimstone (-£41m) and Advanced Short Range Air to Air Missile (-£49m), and Paveway II and III (-£1m) capabilities. Further UK participation in the Joint Integrated Test Force to reflect UK acceptance into service strategy (+£20m). MPR05: Provision for Alternate Helmet Mounted Display System removed (-£40m). Reassessment of 2004/05 forecast expenditure (-£12m). Review of miscellaneous requirement including Exchange of Letters Risk Provision (-£40m), design of UK Specific Support (-£3m), Environmental Protection (-£3m) and Autonomic Logistic Information System interoperability (-£6m). Block IV weapons as a result of Joint Strike</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Fighter programme re-alignment (-£368m) and associated increase Cost of Capital charge (+£44m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-88</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>MPR07: Exchange rate against profile until 2013 (-£11m). Change in dollar/pound exchange rate (MPR06
+£9m; MPR05 -£181m; MPR04 -£85m;
MPR03 -£9m; MPR02 +£189m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+113</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>MPR07: Re-alignment of programme now included in Development - Ship-borne Rolling and Vertical Landing (+£55m). MPR05: Reduction of Risk line as a result of programme delays (-£29m). MPR 04: Reexamination of risk within the overall programme. (+£87m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-202</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the approved figures at Main Gate (-£213m). Variation due to revised approval figures (+£11m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-402</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
1167
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2005/2006
</td>
<td>
2007/2008
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost[^1]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
Original ISD Definition: 8 embarked aircraft at Readiness 2 (2-5 days notice to move). MPR08 ISD Definition: 6 embarked aircraft at Readiness 2 (2-5 days notice to move). Reason for change: to align with the US acquisition framework and definitions.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>The tailored Demonstration Main Gate noted but did not approve ISD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (months)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th></th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3"></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
Survivability
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
Interoperability
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
Combat radius
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
Mission performance
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
Mission reliability
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
Logistic footprint
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
Sortie generation rates
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 04</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>The Short Take Off element of KUR 04 (based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be changed in the ongoing KUR review, although current projections indicate robust Short Take Off performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight challenges and propulsion system integration issues place the Vertical Landing Bring Back element of KUR 04 at increased risk; the Integrated Project Team has commenced programme action to amend the System Development and Demonstration contract to satisfy a requirement to undertake Shipborne Rolling Vertical Landing.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 06</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Subject to intensive programme action by Prime Contractor. Funded design options that significantly reduce risk have been identified and further changes will be considered in due course.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Approval was obtained in November 1996 to enter the Concept Demonstration Phase on the

Joint Strike Fighter programme under a Memorandum of Understanding signed in December 1995. The phase began in November 1996 with two competing US Prime Contractors (Boeing and Lockheed Martin) designing weapons systems and flying demonstration aircraft on which the selection of the preferred bidder was based. The phase completed in October 2001 with the announcement of Lockheed Martin as the successful bidder. Studies into alternative options to Joint Strike Fighter to meet the requirement were also conducted but were rejected on cost effective grounds. The options were US F/A18E aircraft, French Rafale M, a “navalised” Eurofighter and an advanced Harrier.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 144                       | 7.3%                                                      |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 150                       | 7.6%                                                      |
| Variation                     | -6                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
January 2001
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals[^3]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>1971</td>
<td>2034</td>
<td>2236</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Forecast ISD at Main Gate<sup>†</sup>
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2012
</td>
<td>April 2014</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2012
</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK

[^1]: In order to match the US procurement cycle the JCA Main Gate was tailored for Development only. Unit Production Cost approval will be sought as part of MG UK production approval.

[^2]: The In Service Date (ISD) approval will be sought as part of the incremental Production Approval strategy.

[^3]: Three point estimates for the Production Phase have yet to be determined, as costs are dependant on the final aircraft numbers.

† For Main Gate Development approval, ISD was noted, not approved.
