---
Year: 2007.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate
Project: GUIDED MULTIPLE LAUNCH ROCKET SYSTEM (GMLRS)
Page_from: 69.0
Page_to: 76.0
Project_label: GUIDED MULTIPLE LAUNCH ROCKET SYSTEM (GMLRS)
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2007_69_76.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

GUIDED MULTIPLE

LAUNCH ROCKET SYSTEM

(GMLRS)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

ARTILLERY SYSTEMS

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the PROJECT

## 1a. Project Description, Progress and Key Future Events

Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System (GMLRS) will Replace Unguided MLRS M26 Rockets from 2007 as the Latter Reach the End of their Shelf Life and Enter a Disposal Programme. GMLRS Rockets will be Fired from Modified M270 MLRS Launchers: The Requirement is for a Rocket that will Increase MLRS’s Range from 30km to at Least 60km, with a Reduction in Heat and Smoke Signature. the Rocket will Use the Global Positioning System and Inertial Guidance in Order to Achieve the Required Accuracy and Significantly Increase Its Effectiveness. the Payload Was Initially Planned to Consist of Bomblets, but in July 2005 the Decision Was Taken to Change to a High Explosive Unitary Warhead Taking Advantage of an Accelerated US Programme. GMLRS is a Modular Design, to Allow Other Payloads to be Easily Incorporated.

The Increased Precision of GMLRS will Reduce the Number of Rockets Required to Defeat a Target. This will Allow Stocks of GMLRS to be Significantly Lower than Those for the M26 Rocket, Thus Reducing the Logistic Burden and Eventual Disposal Costs. at Main Gate, the UK's Requirement Was for 6,500 GMLRS Rockets. However, Reviews During the Equipment Planning (EP) Process Have Caused the Quantity to Fluctuate, Due to Changing Customer Priorities and Funding Constraints. in Addition, Operational Analysis Emerging from a Related Programme, Indirect Fire Precision Attack (IFPA), Has Led to a Review of GMLRS Quantities and Delivery Schedule. the Required Quantity of GMLRS Currently Stands at 4,080 Rockets; of this Quantity, 1,488 Rockets will be Procured under the GMLRS Programme. Funding for the Remainder Has Been Transferred to the IFPA Programme, under which Further Assessment of Quantities will be Carried Out, to Establish the Future Requirement for GMLRS in the Context of the Overall Procurement of IFPA Munitions.

The UK Placed an Order for Its First Batch of GMLRS Rockets (654) in August 2005, via the US Department of Defense, and Deliveries Commenced in January 2007. to Date Only the UK Has Formally Entered into Collaborative Manufacture, with the US. the in Service Date for GMLRS Was Achieved on 30 March 2007.

## 1b. Associated Projects

| Critical to Achievement of ISD     |              | Critical to Initial Gate Requirement |              |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Project Title                          | Forecast ISD | Project Title                            | Forecast ISD |
| MLRS Future Fire Control System (FFCS) | March 2007   | \-                                       | \-           |

## 1c. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>contractor(s)</Th>
<th>contract Scope</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lockheed Martin Missiles and Fire Control, Dallas</Td>
<td>collaborative Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>single Source Contract Placed by US Department of Defense</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance Against Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
91
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
360
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-269
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
-172
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Reasons for Variation from Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2007</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>expenditure During 2006/07 Was less than Forecast.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2007</Td>
<td>-165</Td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</Td>
<td>an Option in Equipment Plan 2007 Transferred Funding to IFPA. (See Section 1a above)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
November 2006
</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>programme Costs Reduced in the Light of a more Favourable Exchange Rate that Occurred During the Year.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
June 2006
</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>lower Cost of Capital Resulting from a Decision to Defer the Delivery of Batch 2 Rockets by 2 Years.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-123</Td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</Td>
<td>customer Review Reduced Quantity of Rockets from 6,204 to 4,080 (-£114m). Customer Review Reduced Quantity of Rockets from 6,500 to 6,204 (-£9m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+114</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>cost Increase Reflecting a Higher Unit Price for the First Batch of Rockets than Previously Forecast by the US Department of Defense.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date</Td>
<td>variation (£m)</Td>
<td>factor</Td>
<td>explanation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+13</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>two Savings Measures Deferred Deliveries of Rockets, Causing an Increase in Price Due to Inflation (+£7m), and Increased Cost of Capital Due to Changed Delivery Profile (+£1m). Final Version of Equipment Plan 2003 Incorporated Increased Cost for Manufacture Phase (+£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>correction of Cost Error in Equipment Plan 2003.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-64</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>revaluation of Programme Cost to Reflect Revised Exchange Rates (-£47m), (-£17m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-41</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimate at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-269</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</Th>
<th>
38
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of Peak Procurement Expenditure</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2006/2007
</Td>
<td>
2010/2011
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2e. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">unit Production Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>current</Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Current
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>0.05</Td>
<td>0.06</Td>
<td>6,500</Td>
<td>
1,488
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 78%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>isd Definition:</Th>
<th>
Original ISD Definition: Provision of War Reserve Quantities of Rockets (1,000) to Support One Battery at Medium Scale of Effort. MPR06 ISD Definition: The Ability to Deploy a MLRS Battery with a Stockpile of 654 Rockets in Support of a Medium Scale War Fighting Operation. Reason for Change: ISD Redefined as a Result of Sponsor (DEC-DTA) Review, in January 2005. MPR07 ISD Definition: The Ability to Deploy an MLRS Troop of Four Launchers with a Stockpile of 156 Rockets in Support of Operations. Reason for Change: ISD Redefined as a Result of the Sponsor (DEC-DTA) Review in September 2006.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3b. Performance Against Approved in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast ISD</Td>
<td>
March 2007
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
January 2008
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation (Months)</Td>
<td>
-10
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3c. Reasons for Variation from Approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2007</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</Td>
<td>mod and the Contractor Accelerated the Programme to Meet the Operational Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>a Savings Measure Deferred Funding, Causing Delay to ISD.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimate at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3d. Cost Resulting from ISD Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>type of Cost/Saving</Th>
<th>
Cost £m
</Th>
<th>
Saving £m
</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>e. Operational Impact of ISD Variation</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance Against Approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>forecast to be

Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>maximum Range of less than 60km Upon Introduction into UK Service</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</Td>
<td>minimum Range of No Greater than 15km Upon Introduction into UK Service</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</Td>
<td>capable of Being Stored, and Shall Function Correctly Thereafter, in a Range of Climatic Conditions.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</Td>
<td>shall Achieve Specified Destructive Effect Against the Designated Target Arrays with the Specified Numbers of Rockets.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</Td>
<td>in Global Positioning System Mode the Deflection and Range Error of the Munitions Effect to be No Worse than 150m from the Point of Aim for Each Rocket, at all Ranges, and the GMLRS Rocket Shall be Delivered Predictably Within the Required Target Area.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</Td>
<td>to be Compatible with Current in-Service and Planned Rocket Launchers.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td>shall Incorporate a Payload with a Hazardous Dud Rate less than 1%.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</Td>
<td>shall be Interoperable Amongst the Five GMLRS Partner Nations.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</Td>
<td>shall Have Reduced Visual and Infra Red Signature Compared to the M26 Rocket.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</Td>
<td>shall Have a Probability of Correctly Functioning of at Least 93%
Throughout a 10 Year Shelf Life.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">100 %</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 4b. Reasons for Variation Against Approved Key Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2007</Td>
<td>kur 04</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>effect on the Full Target Set will not be Achieved until the Tri-Mode Fuze is Incorporated in GMLRS, which will Occur when the Next Batch of Rockets is Delivered.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2007</Td>
<td>kur 06</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>the Travelling Speed of Launchers is Currently Restricted when Carrying GMLRS Rockets, for Reliability Reasons. It is Expected that this Restriction will be Lifted Once Further Trials Have Been Conducted.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2007</Td>
<td>kur 10</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>this KUR Cannot be Met until GMLRS Has Been in Service for 10 Years. However, Rocket Life Assessment Continues to Progress Towards Meeting this KUR.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP to MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

An Approval Equivalent to Initial Gate Was Obtained in July 1998 for the UK to Participate in a Collaborative GMLRS Assessment Phase with the Other MLRS Partner Nations (France, Germany, Italy and the US). as Part of this Phase, and Acting on Behalf of the Partner Nations, the US

Department of Defense (DOD) Awarded a Prime Contract to Lockheed Martin Missiles and Fire

Control (LMMFC) in November 1998 to Develop a GMLRS Carrier Rocket. the UK Contributed 12.5% of the Cost of the Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD) Contract. the EMD Contract Was Completed in Early 2003, Having Been Extended by the DOD from Its Earlier Planned End Date of November 2002. This Extension, Together with Protracted Negotiations with the US Regarding the Arrangements for Manufacture, Caused the Deferral of Main Gate Approval from December 2002 to August 2003. the Purpose of the EMD Phase Was to Reduce Costs and Risk Through the Use of Offthe-Shelf Components and Sub-Assemblies, and by Maximising Sub-Contractor Competition. All MLRS Partner Nations Have Equal Rights to the Design Resulting from the EMD Contract.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
<th>proportion of Total Estimated Procurement Expenditure</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>actual Cost</Td>
<td>
14
</Td>
<td>
13%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td>
17%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>date of Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
August 2003
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date of Initial Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
July 1998
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>length of Assessment Phase [months]</Td>
<td>
61
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5d. Cost Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Forecast at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
291
</Td>
<td>
319
</Td>
<td>
360
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>expected Envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
399
</Td>
<td>
419
</Td>
<td>
503
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5e. ISD Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>latest Acceptable</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Forecast ISD at Main Gate
</Td>
<td>
March 2006
</Td>
<td>
March 2007
</Td>
<td>
January 2008
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Envelope Within which Capability Was Expected to be Available at Initial Gate
</Td>
<td>
December 2007
</Td>
<td>june 2009</Td>
<td>
December 2010
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

THIS PAGE is INTENTIONALLY BLANK
