---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Cipher
Page_from: 218.0
Page_to: 224.0
Project_label: Cipher
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_218_224.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 55%" />
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Cipher
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Networks
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Chief Information Officer - John Taylor
</Td>
<td>02/04/2013</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects / Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Cipher
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Cipher will Provide Protection for all of MOD’s Sensitive Information and Communications both at Home and Overseas. the Project Encapsulates Work to Renew the MOD Cryptographic Inventory and Key Management Systems. Cipher will Replace a Number of Current Systems, in Particular the General Key Management System.

There are Three Business Drivers for Cipher. the First is to Overcome the Obsolescence of Existing Equipment and Key Management Systems. the Second is to Enable Network Agility and Interoperability with Our Allies. the Final Driver is to Improve Security and Efficiency in the Delivery of Cryptographic Services.

Cipher will be Delivered in Three Increments. Increment 1 Provides an Enduring Operational Capability, Increment 2 Replaces all Legacy Services and Increment 3 Providing the Additional Services Required to Satisfy New Requirements.

The MOD Uses Three Levels of Technology Maturity Metrics. These Are:

1.  Technology Readiness Levels to Describe the Levels of Maturity that are Embodied in Systems.

2.  System Readiness Levels for the Integrated Systems.

3.  Information Readiness Levels which Provide a Meaningful Measurement of the Maturity of the Information Design.

Cipher is a Large, Complex Information-Centric Programme, Involving Government

Communication Headquarters (GCHQ) and Therefore Information Readiness Levels Have Been Selected to Report Against for this Project.

1.  Assessment Phase History

Cipher is a Combination of Two Earlier MOD Projects, the Future Crypto Programme (Delivering the Hardware) and Interoperable Electronic Key Distribution (the Complementary System to Deliver Keying Material, and Other Supporting Configuration and Management Data). the Initial Gate Approval, Issued in August 2007, for a Combined Assessment Phase for the Two Programmes Authorised an Assessment Phase Funding \\\ at 50% Confidence with Agreement that the Funding Could be Increased to
\\\ at 75% Confidence Subject to Written Confirmation from Head of Capability that the Additional Funding Was Available. No Delivery Phase Timescale or Funding Estimate Was Provided in the Initial Gate Submission Beyond the Available Ten Year Funding Profile. However, an Information Note Issued in December 2008 Stated 2012 as the Date for the Initial Operating Capability.

Following Initial Gate Approval, Two Consortia Were Down-Selected and Awarded “assessment Phase" Contracts in November 2008 to Evaluate Potential Options, Develop Solutions, Undertake Demonstration Programmes and Deliver Costed Delivery Phase Proposals. the Competition Was Undertaken in Accordance with the Initial Gate Strategy and the Procurement Strategy and both Consortia Agreed to at Least Match MOD Funding for their Assessment Phase Programmes of Work.

Recognising the Importance of Cipher and Its Potential Use Across Government, the Government Communication Headquarters Has Engaged Proactively, Providing Guidance on Standards to Ensure that the Resulting Solutions and Services can be Readily Adopted by Other Government Departments and Partners Across Government and be Interoperable with Our Allies.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>in June 2010, the Defence Equipment and Support Performance Delivery Improvement Team Issued a Report on Cipher. Head of Capability Responded by Producing a Project Mandate Defining the Project Vision, Scope, Outcomes, Delivery Timelines and Governance Arrangements. an Information Note Was Submitted to the Investment Appraisal Board in January 2011 to Notify of the Changes Necessary, with a Review of Progress Being Held in February 2011 at a 2-Star Foundation Milestone Review. a Review Note Was Submitted to the Investment Approval Board in April 2011 Seeking Approval for the Revised Project Timescales, the Adoption of an Incremental Acquisition Strategy and a Revision to the Approved Budgetary Level for the Assessment Phase  to the Initial Gate Approval at 50% Confidence. the Programme Includes Four Key Mitigation Actions of a) Maturing the Incremental Approach, b) Enhancing the Delivery Team with Additional MOD and Government Communications Headquarters Staff, c) Developing a Detailed and Resourced Plan and d) Improving Stakeholder and Benefits Management. of These, A, c and d Have Progressed Well. This Left Mitigation Action Falling Short with Regard to Additional MOD Staff. the Review Note Outcome Resulted in Contract Amendments for both Companies, Increased Spend for the Extant Project Team (Including Specialist Technical Support and Government Communication Headquarters Staff) by Virtue of the Longer Time Frame and a Proportion for Risk Reduction Activities. the Outcome of the February 2011 Foundation Milestone Review Was to Proceed, but with the Direction that all Outstanding Actions from the Performance Delivery Improvement Treatment Phase Would be Addressed. the Additional Funding Required for the Delivery of the Extended Assessment Phase Was Identified and Revised Staffing Levels Agreed. Funding Was Used to Extend the Contracts of Logica and Thales. Cipher Proceeded with the Successful Completion of the Tender Evaluation Process in February 2012. the Public Announcement of the Preferred Bidder Was Delayed (Pending Resolution of a Number of Significant Commercially Sensitive Issues). as at March 2012, the Intent Remained to Submit the Main Gate Business Case for Increment 1 to Investment Approvals Committee in September 2012. However in Late 2011, Defence Equipment and Support 3 Star Lead for Cipher Chief of Material Joint Enablers Queried the Maturity of the National Level 2 Design and Deliverability. as a Result, a Detailed Review of the Procurement Strategy Was Required to Precede the Main Gate Decision. Representation from the Preferred Bidder Joined the Project Team in Corsham. Both MOD and Government Communication Headquarters Personnel Worked Closely and Good Progress Continued to be Made. the Next Phase of the Project is Completion of the National Level 2 Design (a more Detailed Design which is Needed to Complete the Service Requirement Document) which is Being Managed and Delivered using Government Communication Headquarter ‘best Practice’ System Engineering Methodology and Process. a Number of Planning Round 2012 Options Were Raised to Re-Align Finances which Would if Taken, Impact the Project and Collectively Extend the Transition Period, Delay the Realisation of Benefits and Extend the Life of the Project (but Overall Affordability Would Have Improved as a Result). Both Planning Round Options Were Taken. as Reflected in the Completed (March 2012) Office of Government Commerce Level 3 Review (Investment Decision), the Availability of Sufficient Suitably Qualified Experienced Personnel in Project Manpower (Crown Servants) Was a Serious Issue (AMBER/RED), and There Were Well Known Weaknesses in External Governance and Senior Stakeholder Support that that Needed to be Addressed. a Coherent and Appropriately Resourced Joint Crypto Modernisation Programme to Coordinate and Span MOD, Government Communication Headquarters and Other Government Departments (as Applicable) Activities in this Area Was Set Up. the Office of Government Commerce Gateway Level 3 Review Again Highlighted the High Levels of Technical Risk Inherent in the Approach (i.e. to Proceed to Main Gate in Advance of Completion of the Level 2 Design).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  in-Year Progress

This Difficult and Complex Project Has Continued to Address the Challenges of the CIPHER Design over the Past Year and Has Failed to Make the Expected Progress. in Order to Mitigate the Risk of Project Failure, and is Prudent and Routine for Major Projects, a Series of Alternative Approaches and Fallbacks Were Considered and Developed. Detailed Consideration Was Given to These Alternatives but None Offered the Required Equipment Capability at Long-Term Value for Money.

Since the End of the Reporting Year an Internal Review Within MOD Concluded that Risk-Reduction Work and Associated Contracts on CIPHER Should Cease and this Decision Was Implemented. Since this Time, MOD Has Been Developing Options for Taking the Requirement Forward.

1.  Capability Risks

Capability Risks if Cipher is Delayed:

Existing Crypto Capability Lacks the Flexibility to Deliver Network Enabled Capability.

Efficiency Savings Related to Automation of Crypto Capability are Delayed Leading to Increased Demand on Service Manpower.

1.  Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>key Production Authority Futures Project</Td>
<td>december 2015</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project /
Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cipher</Td>
<td>
Competitive - UK
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="7">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="5">
The Cipher Intergrated Logistic Support Strategy Aims to Provide a Robust and 'Fit for Purpose' Solution and Assured Adherence to the Support Solution. It will Articulate the Support Framework that will be Required for Cipher, Bringing Together the Major Elements of Support, Including the Potential Contractor Logistic Support Arrangements, the Support Solution Envelope and the Role of the Crypto System Operating Authority Plus Networks Crypto Services for Defence. the Plan will be Developed Through Progressive Discussion with the Major Intergrated Logistic Support Stakeholders.
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">increment 1</Td>
<td>awaiting Announcement</Td>
<td>demonstration to Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Fixed Price
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Competitive - UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/ Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cipher</Td>
<td>19</Td>
<td>66</Td>
<td>+47</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td>
66
</Td>
<td>
+47
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>budgeted for Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>highest Forecast (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cipher</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>25</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>39</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>25</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>39</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cipher</Td>
<td>august 2007</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>budgeted for Forecast</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cipher</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
1
</Td>
<td>
2
</Td>
<td>
1-9
</Td>
<td>cipher Uses Information Readiness Levels. This is Explained under Section A.1. the Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable
