---
year: 2010.0
project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
project: Future Rapid Effects System
page_from: 25.0
page_to: 28.0
project_label: Future Rapid Effects System
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2010_25_28.md
---
Team Responsible

MEDIUM ARMOURED TRACKS TEAM

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Head of Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

Number of Projects / Increments

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision – Specialist Vehicle • Pre Main Investment Decision – Utility Vehicle

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The Ministry of Defence has outlined a two pronged approach to meeting its armoured fighting vehicle requirement. In the short term it has an urgent need to upgrade the current fleet. In the longer term it needs to equip United Kingdom Armed Forces with a medium weight capability that would be able to project power world-wide rapidly. Future Rapid Effect System is the response to this longer term requirement.

Future Rapid Effect System will deliver a new, medium weight armoured vehicle fleet with higher levels of deployability and survivability than the current fleet, with the potential to grow its capability as new technology becomes available. The current planning assumption is to deliver over 3,000 vehicles. The original requirement was for 1,757 vehicles but this was increased in 2004 under an equipment programme option when the Total Fleet Requirement had been established.

Future Rapid Effect System will be part of a balanced force consisting of Heavy, Medium and Light brigades giving the ability to deploy forces rapidly with higher levels of firepower, protection and mobility than Light Forces can achieve, but with deployability and agility that cannot be achieved by Heavy Forces. The current threat on operations, particularly from rocket propelled grenades, heavy machine guns and mines/improvised explosive devices, has reinforced the need for adequately protected armoured vehicles.

Future Rapid Effect System will replace the Army’s obsolescent Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked), Saxon and FV 430 vehicles.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

The Future Rapid Effect System fleet will encompass 16 roles. The total capability is expected to comprise five families of vehicles: Utility, Reconnaissance, Medium Armour, Manoeuvre Support and Basic Capability Utility. An incremental approach to capability delivery is envisaged with an Initial Operating Capability comprising the first elements of the Reconnaissance family followed by a phased approach to delivering the full capability in planned increments thereafter.

The initial Assessment Phase was approved in April 2004. This focussed on the Utility Vehicle family, the first group of vehicles that would make up the Initial Operating Capability. A number of competitions were launched to deliver this capability. However, following the December 2008, Equipment Examination the priority for the Future Rapid Effect System shifted from Utility Vehicle to the Scout Vehicle (part of the Reconnaissance family), with Assessment Phase activities focussed on the Specialist Vehicle capability (Reconnaissance and Medium Armour).

The Utility Vehicle expenditure of £133m during the Assessment Phase has supported activities that have developed Future Rapid Effect System requirements. The Department believes this has increased technological maturity and enhanced the project community knowledge; all these aspects have been captured and retained for the future benefit of the programme.

Assessment activities conducted to date indicate that there is a cost benefit in consolidating vehicle families and variants (where feasible), using a Common Base Platform, a base vehicle onto which role specific sub-systems can be incorporated (e.g. cannon, repair, recovery). Industrial studies completed during the Assessment Phase confirmed the viability of a Common Base Platform for the most demanding variants requirements, namely Medium Armour and Scout.

Assessment phase findings concluded that at least two competing (Prime) platform suppliers could develop suitable Modified Off The Shelf solutions.

## A.3. Progress

The Utility Vehicle programme is currently on hold following the Equipment Examination in December 2008 and an option taken as part of the Department’s 2009 financial planning round that has deferred all funding for the Utility Vehicle until April 2012.

The Specialist Vehicle element of the Future Rapid Effect System programme continues to make good progress and secured Investment Approvals Board and Ministerial approval in June 2008 for funding to conduct an Assessment Phase.

The Specialist Vehicle Acquisition Strategy was approved in July 2009. The approved approach is to appoint through competition, a prime contractor to deliver the Demonstration, Manufacture and initial In-Service phases of the requirement.

Following the assessment of a Pre Qualification Questionnaire. BAE Systems Global Combat System and General Dynamics UK were issued an Invitation To Tender.

At the conclusion of the tender and approvals process, General Dynamics UK were announced as the preferred bidder on 22 March 2010. At the time of this report, the MOD is in negotiation with General Dynamics UK with the intention of placing a Demonstration Phase contract for Reconnaissance Block 1 and the Common Base Platform.

The Future Rapid Effect System has been recast from a single programme into three constituent programmes; Specialist Vehicle, Utility Vehicle and Manoeuvre Support. The Future Rapid Effect System funding lines have now been split across the three programmes and in future will be reported separately in the MPR.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Strategic Defence Review New Chapter 2002 and Defence White Paper 2003 set out the need for expeditionary focused, balanced and rapidly deployable medium weight forces. Defence Strategic Guidance 2005 directed that medium forces should be based on Armoured Fighting Vehicles optimized for rapid effect, a theme continued in Defence Strategic Guidance 2008.

Future Rapid Effect System will deliver a fleet of new medium weight armoured vehicles which will provide better protection, operational mobility and firepower than light forces; but without the logistic footprint of a heavy force. Future Rapid Effect System forces will be effective across the operational spectrum, conducting operations from peacekeeping to warfighting. Future Rapid Effect System equipped forces will form the backbone of the Land component of the Joint Medium Weight Capability and contribute significantly to the Army’s Balanced Force.

Failure to proceed would therefore put at risk the timely provision of a new flexible, rapid intervention capability. Concurrently, those in-service vehicles (e.g. Saxon, Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked)) due to be replaced by Future Rapid Effect System would incur increasing support costs and obsolescence.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 34%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th colspan="2">Critical to achievement of IOC</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>Forecast IOC</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect Systems – Recce Block1/2/3</td>
<td>Common Cannon &amp;
Ammunition Project.</td>
<td>May 2013</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="7">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Description
</td>
<td colspan="6">
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Future Rapid Effect System Utility Vehicle</td>
<td colspan="6">Acquisition Programme with full and open competition</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicles</td>
<td colspan="4">Acquisition Programme with full and open competition</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>Actual Cost as a proportio n of total estimated procurem ent expenditu re (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Utility Vehicle Assessment Phase</td>
<td>113</td>
<td>162</td>
<td>+49</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Specialist Vehicles Assessment Phase</td>
<td>109</td>
<td>76</td>
<td>-33</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>222</td>
<td>238</td>
<td>+16</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Utility Vehicle</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Specialist Vehicle</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – not applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost – not applicable

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 48%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Previous expenditure to 31 March 2009</th>
<th>In-year expenditure</th>
<th>Total expenditure to 31 March 2010</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase (£m)</td>
<td>141</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>186</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure (£m)</td>
<td>141</td>
<td>45</td>
<td>186</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 34%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Forecast / Actual Date of Main</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
Gate Approval
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
(months)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Utility Vehicle</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
May 2004
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Specialist Vehicle</td>
<td>
March 2010
</td>
<td>
June 2008
</td>
<td>
21
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Earliest

Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Utility Vehicle</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Specialist Vehicle</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – not applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – not applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures – not applicable

## D.2. Performance against Defence Lines of Development – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures – not applicable
