---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Gate
Project: FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM
Page_from: 201.0
Page_to: 204.0
Project_label: Future Rapid Effects System
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_201_204.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

| Picture not Available. |
|----------------------------|

FUTURE RAPID EFFECT

SYSTEM

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability: Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the REQUIREMENT

The MoD Has Outlined a Two Track Approach to Meeting Its Armoured Fighting Vehicle Requirement. in the Short Term it Has an Urgent Need to Upgrade the Current Fleet. in the Longer Term it Needs to Equip United Kingdom Armed Forces with a Medium Weight Capability that Would be Able to Project Power World-Wide Rapidly. Future Rapid Effect System is the Response to this Longer Term Requirement.

Future Rapid Effect System will Deliver a New, Medium Weight Armoured Vehicle Fleet with Higher Levels of Deployability and Survivability than the Current Fleet, with the Potential to Grow Its Capability as New Technology Becomes Available. the Current Planning Assumption is to Deliver over 3,000 Vehicles. the Original Requirement Was for 1,757 Vehicles but this Was Increased in 2004 under an Equipment Programme Option when the Total Fleet Requirement Had Been Established.

Future Rapid Effect System will be Part of a Balanced Force Consisting of Heavy, Medium and Light Brigades Giving the Ability to Deploy Forces Rapidly with Higher Levels of Firepower, Protection and Mobility than Light Forces can Achieve, but with Deployability and Agility that Cannot be Achieved by Heavy Forces. the Current Threat on Operations, Particularly from Rocket Propelled Grenades, Heavy Machine Guns and Mines/Improvised Explosive Devices, Has Reinforced the Need for Adequately Protected Armoured Vehicles.

Future Rapid Effect System will Replace the Army’s Obsolescent Saxon, FV 430 and Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked) Vehicles.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-Service Dates and Costs are not Set until Projects Reach the Point in Time when the Main Investment Decision is Made I.e Main Gate Approval. Until this Point all Costs and Dates are Outline Assumptions Solely for Internal Planning Purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Future Rapid Effect System Fleet will Encompass 16 Roles. the Total Capability is Expected to Comprise Five Families of Vehicles;
Utility, Reconnaissance, Medium Armour, Manoeuvre Support and Basic Capability Utility. an Incremental Approach to Capability Delivery is Envisaged with an Initial Operating Capability Comprising the First Elements of the Utility Fleet Followed by a Phased Approach to Delivering the Full Capability in Planned Increments Thereafter. the Initial Assessment Phase Was Approved in April 2004 and Has Focused Primarily on Those Roles that will Make Up the Initial Operating Capability. the Assessment Phase Has Involved Analysing the Options for Meeting the Requirement, Managing the Programme of Technical Risk Reduction Work and Developing the Acquisition Strategy for Future Phases.

Options for Meeting the Utility Vehicle Requirement Included Solutions Currently Available Off the Shelf, Existing Development Programmes and New Start Options. Vehicles Currently Available Off the Shelf Were Assessed to be Unable, Now or in the Future, to Carry the Weight Necessary to Meet the Future Rapid Effect System Protection Requirements. New Start Options Were Considered Too Long and Too Costly and Therefore both Off the Shelf and New Start Options Were Discounted. an Assessment of Platforms Currently in Development Indicated that They Have the Potential to Operate at the Weight Necessary to Provide Adequate Protection. the Potential of Current Development Vehicles to Meet the Future Rapid Effect System Requirement Has Therefore Been the Basis of Our more Detailed Assessment of the Candidate Designs in 2007.

The Acquisition Strategy Has Been Approved. the Approved Approach is to Establish an Alliance Led by the Department, Who will be Supported by a Strong and Independent Industrial Player Acting in the Role of System of Systems Integrator. the Strategy Includes a Strong Competitive Element with the Utility Vehicle Design, the System of Systems Integrator and the Utility Vehicle Integrator to be Selected by Competition.

The Competition to Select the Utility Vehicle Design Was Formally Launched in January 2007 when the Department Invited Expressions of Interest from Industry. This Invitation Represented a Single Point of Entry into both the Utility Vehicle Design and Utility Vehicle Integrator Competitions. Following a Pre-Qualification Process, Three Designs (Boxer Designed by ARTEC, Vehicule Blinde De Combat d’Infantrie Designed by Nexter and Piranha Designed by Mowag and Offered by General Dynamics (UK) Ltd) Were Selected to Go Forward into the Formal Utility Vehicle Trials, Held During the Summer of 2007. the Trials Included a Demonstration of Current Performance, an Assessment of How the Designs Could Best be Exploited to Meet the Needs of the Future Rapid Effect System Programme; and a Review of Commercial Aspects of the Designs. in November 2007, MoD Announced the Completion of the Trials and that a Recommendation, Based Primarily on Technical Design Considerations, Had Been Made. Further Work Was then Undertaken to Consider the Commercial Implications of the Three Competing Designs. This Work Was Completed in December 2007 and the Original Recommendation Was Unchanged. the MoD Announced on 8 May 2008 that PIRANHA v Had Been Selected as the Provisional Preferred Utility Vehicle Design.

The Competition to Select the System of Systems Integrator Was Launched in March 2007 when the Department Invited Expressions of Interest from Industry. on Completion of the Assessment of Responses to the Pre-Qualification Questionnaire, the Team of Thales and Boeing Was Announced as the Preferred Bidder in October 2007. on Successful Completion of Contract Negotiations, the Initial Contract Was Awarded in January 2008.

The Competition to Select the Utility Vehicle Integrator Progressed to the Pre-Qualification Stage with the Release to Industry of a Questionnaire in October 2007. Responses are Now Being Considered by the Department.

Preparation for the Assessment Phase for the Reconnaissance, Medium Armour and Manoeuvre Support Families Has Commenced and Initial Scoping Study Contracts Have Been Awarded to Industry.

A Two Stage Approach to the Main Investment Decision is Envisaged. Stage 1 will be Prior to the Launch of the Demonstration Phase with Stage 2 Releasing Funding for the Manufacture Phase.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
319<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
113<a Href="Fn2" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref2"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>2</Sup></A>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+206
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">includes the Costs of the Assessment Phase for the Initial Operating Capability Roles and also the Assessment Phase for the Specialist Roles.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
<li Id="Fn2">specifically Only Included Approval for the Initial Assessment Phase for the Initial Operating Capability Roles.<a Href="Fnref2" Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

## 2c. Explanation of the Need and Boundaries of Current Internal Planning Assumptions for Introduction of Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>earliest</Th>
<th>latest</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability will be Available</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">future Rapid Effect System will Deliver a New, Medium Weight Armoured Vehicle Fleet with Higher Levels of Deployability and Survivability than the Current Fleet, with the Potential to Grow Its Capability as New Technology Becomes Available. the Detailed Analysis of the Candidate Current Development Platforms will Enable the Performance, Cost, Schedule and Risks of These Candidate Solutions to be Fully Understood and will Inform the Main Investment Decision. the in-Service Date Covers Only the Initial Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2d. Boundaries of Future Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Costs

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A></Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">future Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Costs Highly Sensitive to Vehicle Numbers, which will be Agreed at the Main Investment Decision when Affordability will Need to be Established.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

THIS PAGE is INTENTIONALLY BLANK
