---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Marshall
Page_from: 358.0
Page_to: 363.0
Project_label: Marshall
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_358_363.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 64%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Marshall
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Marshall
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>
Date Appointed
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore C Jones (Command, Control, Communications and Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance
</Td>
<td>16th April 2012</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects /
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Assessment Phase 1 Assessment Phase 2
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

MARSHALL

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Marshall Project (Previously Known as Joint Military Air Traffic Services (JMATS)) Seeks to Sustain the Provision of Air Traffic Management at MOD Airfields and Air Weapons Ranges Through the Provision of New Capability to Meet New Regulatory Airspace Management Requirements Set by the Civil Aviation Authority, Addressing Equipment Obsolescence in the Air Traffic Inventory and Through the more Efficient Delivery of Support Services. Specifically, There is a Requirement to Convert Secondary Surveillance Radar to a New Mode (Mode Select) of Operation by 31 December 2016. Allied to this Requirement, MOD Requires an Annual Dispensation to Continue to Operate Conventional Mode 3a/C Secondary Radars Beyond 31 December 2011. the Project will Provide Air Traffic Services to Military and Civilian Aircraft Arriving At, Departing from and Operating Within the Immediate Vicinity or Confines Of, MOD Aerodromes (United Kingdom, Overseas Permanent and Deployed) and at Air Weapons Ranges.

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

The Assessment Phase of the Marshall Project is Being Conducted in Two Parts. the First Part (Assessment Phase 1) Was Approved on the 17th January 2008. the Purpose Was to both Express the Military Air Traffic Services in Output Terms Through the Development of an Output Based Specification and to Determine the Most Appropriate and Cost Effective Delivery Solution for this Service. in Addition, the Project Has Captured Data on the Condition of the Existing Air Traffic Control Infrastructure (Control Towers, Radar Towers, Radio Masts Etc) as Well as the Number of People Employed in Supporting the Service. Part 1 of the Assessment Phase Completed in October 2009 with the Submission of a Review Note Seeking Approval for Part 2. in December 2010 Joint Military Air Traffic Services Changed Its Name to Project Marshall.

Part 2 of the Assessment Phase Enables Formal Industry Engagement. the Intention is to Use the Competitive Dialogue Process to Determine the Preferred Bidder and Delivery Solution for the Marshall Services Within the Delivery Framework Developed During Assessment Phase Part 1. Part 2 of the Assessment Phase Was Approved in February 2010 but this Was Caveated with the Need to Gain Further Treasury Approval of Key Project Documents Before a Formal Official Journal of the European Union Notice Could be Published. This Was Finally Achieved on 25th March 2011; Much of the Delay Being Caused by Having to Obtain Efficiency Reform Group Approval to Re-Engage Financial and Legal Consultants.

MARSHALL

MARSHALL

## A.3. in-Year Progress

An Official Journal of the European Union Notice, Initiating the Formal Procurement Process Was Issued in

March 2011. This Process Culminated in Three Consortia, Aquila (Thales and National Air Traffic Services), BAE Systems, and Fusion (Lockheed Martin, Selex and Cobham) Being Selected to Participate in the Next Phase of the Project and this Was Planned to Commence in October 2011. However, a Review of the Invitation to Participate in Dialogue Documentation in August 2011 Highlighted that the Documentation Set Was Insufficiently Mature to Release to Industry and some Further Work Was Required to Complete This. a Revised Target Date of March 2012 Resulted.

HMT Issued a Letter on 22nd December 2011 which Challenged the MOD over the Viability of the Project and Asked to Review the Project on a Stop, Revise, Proceed Basis.

In January 2012, and Implementing the Recommendations of an Office of Government Commerce Gateway Review, a Dedicated Team Leader Was Appointed. During His Initial Review of the Project, Further Issues Were Identified where some Additional Work Was Required to Fully Mature the Authority Position (for Example - Use of Military Manpower). This Has Resulted in a Further Delay to Issue of the Invitation to Participate in Dialogue and a Revised Target Date of October 2012 is Now Forecast for Documentation Issue Subject to Necessary Approvals.

As a Result, There Has Been a Corresponding Slip to Future Milestones with Contract Award Now Forecast for Late 2015. an Additional Review Note is Planned for June this Year to Seek an Additional £1 Million to Enable Completion of the Assessment Phase and to Note the Additional Time Required.

These Delays Present a Significant Risk to the Timely Implementation of the Mode Select Secondary Radar Requirement and Alternative Strategies to Mitigate this are Now Being Explored. Any Changes will be Reflected in the Next Major Project Report.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Much of the Equipment that Currently Provides Air Traffic Services to MOD Airfields and Ranges is in Excess of 20 Years Old and is Increasingly Suffering from Obsolescence. Increasing Regulation of United Kingdom Airspace Requires the Implementation of New Radar Surveillance Capability. Failure to Invest in this Capability will Ultimately Reduce the Level of Air Traffic Service Provision to These Locations. This will Reduce the Ability of all Three Services to Train and Fly and Hence the Ability to Project Air Power Wherever and Whenever it is Required.

## A.5. Associated Projects

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="3">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project /
Increment Title</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>public Private Partnership Such as Strategic Partnering. Delivery Partner and Solution to be Sought Through Competitive Dialogue.</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>
Competitive - UK
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Current Planning Assumption is for a Full Air Traffic Management Service Provision where the Provider Determines and is Responsible for the Composition and Delivery of the Support Element Required to Maintain the Service, with Retained MOD Owned Air Traffic Control Assets to Support Deployed Operations
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

MARSHALL

# B. Section B: Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>5</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Forecast (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>marshall</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>january 2008</Td>
<td>october 2009</Td>
<td>21</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>january 2010</Td>
<td>february 2015</Td>
<td>61</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicab

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
1-10
</Td>
<td>at 80% Confidence.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable
