---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Marshall
Page_from: 110.0
Page_to: 117.0
Project_label: Marshall
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_110_117.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Marshall
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Marshall
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore Lincoln Taylor ACOS Air Cap Del CA &amp; ISTAR
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>08/12/2014</Td>
<td>dec 18</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Assessment Phase 1
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision Completed</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Assessment Phase 2
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision Completed</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Demonstration Phase
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">post Main Gate Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Transition / in Service
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">mobilising</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The MoD Requires a Sustainable Military Terminal Air Traffic Management (ATM) Capability that will Enable Air Vehicles to Operate Safely and Effectively with Tactical Freedom, in all Weather Conditions and in any Environment, Within UK Areas of Responsibility, Including Permanent Overseas Airfields, and in Support of UK and Coalition Forces Worldwide. the Marshall Project Provides this Capability via a Contract of 22 Years Duration (with Appropriate Contractual Break Points) with Aquila ATMS Ltd for the Design, Acquisition, Installation, Sustained Delivery and Assurance of a Military Terminal ATM Service. the Capability is Operated by Military Personnel (Except in Those Locations that Have Previously Civilianised ATM Operations).

The Authority to Operate and Regulate UK Military Aircraft is Vested in the Secretary of State for Defence Who Has Directed that the MOD Maintains Equivalence with Civil Air Traffic Management (ATM) Legislation in so Far as is Reasonably Practicable, Whilst Ensuring National Security and Continued Operational Capability. the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review Confirmed the Requirement for the Provision of ATM Services Within Future Force 2020.

The Equipment that Currently Supports Terminal ATM is Becoming Increasingly Obsolete with Key Elements Becoming Unsustainable Beyond 2015. Furthermore, New Capabilities are Required to Maintain Civil Interoperability: The Mandated Implementation of Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR) Mode S and the Adoption of 8.33khz Channel Spacing on VHF Communications; Marshall is Addressing These Issues While Delivering Significant Financial Benefits Compared to the Cost of the Current Capability.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Assessment Phase of the Marshall Project Was Conducted in Two Parts. the First Part (Assessment Phase 1) Was Approved on the 17th January 2008. the Purpose Was to both Express the Military Air Traffic Services in Output Terms Through the Development of an Output Based Specification and to Determine the Most Appropriate and Cost Effective Delivery Solution for this Service. in Addition, the Project Has Captured Data on the Condition of the Existing Air Traffic Control Infrastructure (Control Towers, Radar Towers, Radio Masts Etc.) as Well as the Number of People Employed in Supporting the Service. Part 1 of the Assessment Phase Completed in October 2009 with the Submission of a Review Note Seeking Approval for Part 2. in December 2010 Joint Military Air Traffic Services Changed Its Name to Project Marshall.

Part 2 of the Assessment Phase Enabled Formal Industry Engagement. the Project Followed the

Competitive Dialogue Procedure to Determine the Most Economically Advantageous Solution for the MARSHALL Requirement. a Notification in the Official Journal of the European Union (OJEU) Initiating the Formal Procurement Process Was Issued in March 2011. Three Consortia, Aquila (Thales and National Air Traffic Services), BAE Systems, and Fusion (Lockheed Martin, Selex and Cobham) Were Selected to Participate in Competitive Dialogue. in January 2012 a Dedicated Team Leader for the Marshall Project Was Appointed in Accordance with the Recommendations of an Office of Government Commerce Gateway 0 Review.

## A.3. Project History

The Three Competing Consortia Submitted their Outline Solution Proposals in January 2013. Following Evaluation of the Proposals, an Initial Round of Competitive Dialogue Was Conducted with Each Bidder. BAE Systems Took the Strategic Decision to Withdraw from the Competition in September 2013. the Remaining Two Bidders, Aquila and Fusion Submitted Detailed Solution Proposals in January 2014; These Proposals Were Evaluated, and a Second Round of Competitive Dialogue Commenced.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Following Review by the Chief of Defence Material on 31 March 2014, Timescales for Contract Award Were Accelerated to De-Conflict with Purdah Ahead of the General Election. the Main Gate Business Case Was Signed on 11 August 2014, Evaluation of Final Tender Bids Commenced on 28 August 2014 and Concluded on 28 September 2014. the Contract Was Signed Between MOD and Aquila Air Traffic Management Services on 28 October 2014. Contract Signature Was Followed by a 6 Month Mobilization Phase in Preparation for Aquila Taking on Responsibility for the Availability of in-Scope Legacy Equipment on 01 April 2015. the Mobilisation Phase Included the Preparation for Transfer of Undertakings Protection of Employment (TUPE) Transfer of MOD and Contractor Staff;
Development of Working Practices for Operation and Maintenance Personnel; Development of Governance Structures and Procedures for Equipment Installation to Enable Aquila to Take on Service Delivery Responsibility from 1^st^ April 2015.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Much of the Equipment that Currently Provides Air Traffic Services to MOD Airfields and Ranges is in Excess of 20 Years Old and is Increasingly Suffering from Obsolescence. Furthermore Increasing Regulation of United Kingdom Airspace Requires the Implementation of New Radar Surveillance Capability. Failure to Invest in this Capability will Ultimately Reduce the Level of Air Traffic Service Provision to MOD Operated Airfields and Associated Sites in the UK and Overseas. This will Reduce the Ability of the Front Line Command’s (FLC’s) to Train and Fly and Hence the Ability to Project Air Power Wherever and Whenever it is Required.

The Successful Roll-Out of New Equipment under Marshall will Offset the Equipment Obsolescence Risk. the Previous Piece-Meal Arrangements for Provision of ATM Equipment and Support Meant that MOD Held the Risk of Equipment Un-Availability; this Risk is Now Transferred to Aquila. However, the Previous Arrangements Did Provide MOD with the Ability to Change Equipment Laydown, for Example Increasing Equipment Numbers or Moving Equipment Between Sites – under Marshall, Changes to Requirement are Implemented via Contract Amendment in Order to Adjust the Services and Availability Provided to Specific Sites. This is a Consequence of Contracting for Assured Levels of Availability Rather than Piece-Meal Equipment Arrangements, but may be Perceived by Users and their Chains of Command as a Lack of Agility. the Senior Responsible Owner (SRO) is Managing the Cultural Change Required in the ATM Operational Community.

## A.6. Associated Projects – N/a

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>
Public Private Partnership Such as Strategic Partnering. Delivery Partner and Solution to be Sought Through Competitive Dialogue.
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>
Public Private Partnership Such as Strategic Partnering. Delivery Partner and Solution to be Sought Through Competitive Dialogue.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>
Competitive
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>
Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>marshall</Td>
<td>
Aquila ATMS Ltd
</Td>
<td>
ATM Services &amp; Asset Update
</Td>
<td>22 Year Service Delivery</Td>
<td>
Competitive Dialogue
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>the Contract with Aquila-ATMS Ltd is for a Full Support Package Measured on Availability of the Services.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Through Life Contract

| Project/Increment Name    | Lowest Forecast (£m) | Budgeted for Forecast (£m) | Highest Forecast (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Project Marshall Through Life | 1890                     | 1890                           | 1890                      |
| Total (£m)                | 1890                 | 1890                       | 1890                  |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture and in-Service Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>marshall-Equipment Transition Phase</Td>
<td>410</Td>
<td>410</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>marshall-in Service (During Transition Phase)</Td>
<td>344</Td>
<td>344</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>marshall-Full Operating Capability Phase</Td>
<td>1136</Td>
<td>1136</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>1890</Td>
<td>1890</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost – N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
7
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>40</Td>
<td>40</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>8</Td>
<td>42</Td>
<td>49</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of

Main

Investment

Decision

Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment

Phase

(Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>
Jan 08
</Td>
<td>
Oct 09
</Td>
<td>
22
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>
Feb 10
</Td>
<td>
Aug 14
</Td>
<td>
55
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 5%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 2%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">
Project/Increment Name
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">earliest Approved</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2">budgeted For</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
IOC
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Nov 16
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Feb 17
</Td>
<td>
Jun 17
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">c.3 in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Td>
<td Colspan="4"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Earliest

Approved</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">budgeted For</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Latest Approved
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
IOC
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Nov 16
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">feb 17</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Jun 17
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 5%" />
<col Style="Width: 55%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project/Increment Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>ioc</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
The IOC will be Achieved when a Notice of Service Availability Has Been Issued by the RAF Release to Service Authority (RTSA) in Respect of the Delivery of Mode-S Compliant Co-Operative Surveillance Services to the Highest Priority Sites as Agreed with CAA (Boscombe Down, Brize Norton, Cranwell, Dead Water Fell, Greymare Hill, Honington, Linton-on-Ouse, Scampton, and Shawbury).
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>marshall IOC</Td>
<td>feb 17</Td>
<td>feb 17</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation – N/a

## C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – N/a

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Progress to Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>marshall</Td>
<td>
The FOC will be Achieved when a Notice of Service Availability Has Been Issued by the RTSA in Respect of the Delivery of all Required MARSHALL Technical Services at Every Service Delivery Site.
</Td>
<td>
After Contract Award in October 2014 the Project Moved into a Mobilisation Phase, Allowing the Supplier to Engage with Trade Unions and TUPE Affected Staff. During this Phase the Supplier also Engaged in a Programme of Site Surveys.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score as at 31/03/2015

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 74%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>95</Td>
<td>
Project is Post Main Investment
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Training</Td>
<td>
To Deliver Defence Systems Approach to Traning (DSAT) Compliant Training to all Operators and Maintainers (Including Those at the Central Air Traffic Control School) to Allow the Capability to be Successfully Operated at all Sites.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Initial Operating Capability (IOC) is Delivery of One Example of Each Technical Services for Each Different Method of Delivery of Each of the Technical Services.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Sufficient Competent Personnel Available (Operators and Maintainers) to Deliver the Required Operational Hours of the Capability at all Sites.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
The Defence Infrastructire Organisation (DIO) will Provide Safe and Legally Compliant ATM Infrastructure for Handover to the Project Marshall Service Provider (SP) and Once the Marshall Solution Has Been Implemented, Provide Through Life Maintenance Support to Marshall Infrastructure.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Doctrine and

5.

Concepts
</Td>
<td>
On Entering Service, MARSHALL will Conform to Extant Doctrine, Concepts and Policy, Building on Experiences Gained in Recent Operations.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Organisation</Td>
<td>
To Have an Organisation with Sufficient Competent Personnel to Manage, Operate and Maintain the Capability.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Information</Td>
<td>
To Provide an Assured Communications Capability, in Line with MOD Policy, and the Associated Services to all Ground and Air Platforms and Communications Information Systems (CIS), Including Information Sharing where Required, as Defined Within the Output Based Specification (OBS), to all UK Sites, Overseas Permanent Joint Operating Bases and Deployed Locations.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
8.
</Th>
<th>logistics</Th>
<th>
Logistics Readiness for IOC is the Achievement of the Logistics Support Date (LSD) which is the Identification and Timely Provision of all Support Resources Necessary for One Example of Each Technical Service and for Each Different Method of Delivery for Those Technical Services.”
</Th>
<th>
Yes (with Risk)
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (2)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1. Marshall

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Provide Military Terminal Air Traffic Management (ATM) to MARSHALL Fixed Sites.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 2</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Provide Military Terminal ATM to MARSHALL Deployed Sites.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>2, 7, 8</Td>
<td>
The Air Defence Organisation (ADO) User Shall be Able to Communicate with Air Vehicle Operatives Within Specified Areas of Responsibility (AORs).
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4</Td>
<td>1,3,6</Td>
<td>
The User Requires Sufficient Numbers of Competent, Current and Compliant Operators.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Sustainable Military Terminal ATM Capability.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Military Terminal ATM Capability Availability Necessary to Deliver Terminal ATM Services.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 7</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires that the MARSHALL Solution Shall Provide the Flexibility to Provide a Military Terminal ATM Capability Appropriate to Future Changes in the Defence Need.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (2)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a
