---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Lynx Wildcat
Page_from: 209.0
Page_to: 231.0
Project_label: Lynx Wildcat
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_209_231.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Lynx Wildcat
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Lynx Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Wayne Keble (Air and Littoral Manoeuvre Capability)
</Td>
<td>01 February 2011 01 March 2013</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects /</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Lynx Wildcat
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Lynx Wildcat Capability Was Developed to Meet the Requirements for a Dedicated Small Helicopter for Use in both the Land (Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Requirement) and Maritime (Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Requirement) Environments to Replace the Current Lynx Fleet which is Reaching Its Life End. Lynx Wildcat is a Single-Source, Combined Helicopter Procurement Programme with Westlands Helicopters Ltd which Follows More Effective Contracting Principles. Project Approval is for 80 Aircraft, with Funding for 62 Held by the Integrated Project Team. the Current Requirement is for 30 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters, 8 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters (Light Assault Helicopter Role) and 28 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>initial Gate Approval Was Given in December 2001 for the Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter and in September 2002 for the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft. Following Review under the Future Rotorcraft Programme the Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter Requirement Matured into the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Requirement. Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter:
The Assessment Phase Benchmarked Westland Helicopter Ltd's Lynx Wildcat Proposal Against Alternative Off-the-Shelf Solutions from Other Potential Suppliers and Required the Company to Demonstrate the Necessary Level of Performance to Successfully Deliver the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft:
A Single Tender Contract Was Placed with Westland Helicopter Ltd to Develop and De-Risk their Lynx Wildcat Proposal to Meet the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Requirement in Conjunction with the Approved Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter Programme. Procurement Strategy:
Two Procurement Strategies Were Considered. the First Was to Run a Competition and Second, to Pursue the Westland Helicopter Lynx Wildcat Proposal on a Single Tender Basis - With an Option to Switch from Single Tender to Competition Should the Assessment Phase Indicate that the Lynx Wildcat Solution Was Unlikely to be Cost Effective. the Second Strategy Was the Selected One. the Result of the Assessment Phase Considered the Lynx Wildcat to be the Most Likely of the Options to Deliver the Required Capability by the in-Service Date. This Gave the Benefit of Maintaining Industrial Capability in the UK. Hence a Single Tender Approach Was Judged Most Likely to Offer both the Best Technical Solution and Best Value for Money Overall. the Assessment Phase Successfully De-Risked a Number of Key Requirements, Including Secure Communications, Mission Systems and Engine Certification. Furthermore, Westland Helicopter Ltd's Super Lynx 300 Export Programme Demonstrated their Capability to Insert New T-800 Engines, Glass Cockpit and Avionics into the Lynx Aircraft.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

Within the Department the Aircraft are to be Known as Wildcat Mk1 (Army Helicopter) and Wildcat Mk1 (Helicopter Maritime Attack).

The Demonstration & Manufacture Contract Was Let in June 2006 to Deliver 70 Aircraft: 40 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters for the Army and 30 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft for the Navy with Costed Options for Five more Platforms of Each Type. Preliminary, Interim, Air Vehicle and Air Vehicle & Mission System Critical Design Reviews Were Successfully Achieved in January 2007, October 2007,

April 2008 and August 2009 Respectively. the First Airframe Was Delivered to the Westland Build Line in November 2008 and a Successful
'First Flight' Was Achieved in November 2009 in Accordance with the Schedule Contracted in June 2006. All Three Trials Aircraft are Now Flying Within the Flight Test Programme and Production Aircraft Build Commenced in July 2010. Delivery of First Production Aircraft to the Army Commences in April 2012. the Equipment Examination (2008) Concluded that Reductions Could be Realised in Procurement Costs if the Quantities Were Reduced to 34 Reconnaissance Helicopters and 28 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft, with the Impact on Delivered Capability Minimised Through Introducing Design Changes to Achieve Greater Versatility Between the Two Aircraft Variants. the Protracted Period of Uncertainty Surrounding the Project Ended in December 2008 with the Ministerial Announcement Confirming that the Project Would Proceed to Full Scale Production. a Planning Round 2010 Option Was Run to Address the Legislative and Safety Requirement to Fit all Combat Aircraft Including Helicopters with Fuel System Survivability Measures.

Through-Life Training & Support Solutions Have Been Developed as Part of the Project. an Information Note Was Approved in July 2007 to Submit the Support Solution Review Note in September 2009. Approval Was also Given for the Training Service Initial Gate Business Case in August 2007 Based on the 4-Stage PFI Treasury Approval Process. While Investigating Alternative Ways to Deliver the Lynx Wildcat Capability During the Equipment Examination, the Opportunity to Deliver Reduced Through Life Costs Was Identified. a Review Note Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in December 2008 and Approved in January 2009, Detailing a New Strategy to Explore a Single Source, Integrated Support Solution and Training Delivery Service Through the Aircraft Manufacturer, AgustaWestland, and Reflected a Revised Recommendation Submission Date to the Investment Approvals Board in Late 2010. the Contract for the Provision of Training Capital Equipment, Required to Support Aircrew, Groundcrew and Maintainer Training Was Let in February 2011 and the Wildcat Integrated Training and Support Contract Was Let in January 2012.

Planning Round 2011 Option Resulted in a Change of Aircraft Mix to a Total Fleet of 66 Wildcat Aircraft Comprising 30 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters, 8 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters (Light Assault Helicopter Role) and 28 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft. a Further Planning Round 2011 Option Was Run to Revise the Profile of the Resources Available for the Wildcat Project Between Financial Year 2014/2015 and Financial Year 2015/2016.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>production Aircraft Build Continues to Schedule with Six Army Helicopter Having Achieved Flight Milestones with a Further Four Army Helicopter and Two Helicopter Maritime Attack Aircraft in Production. the Build Standard for the First Batch of Production Aircraft to be Delivered to the Army Has Been Confirmed and the Interim Certificate of Design Was Issued in March 2012. Significant Unanticipated Activity Has Been Undertaken to Satisfy the Emerging Regulatory Instructions Issued by the Recently Formed Military Aviation Authority (MAA). Following the Issue of the Aircraft Release Recommendations by the Independent Technical Evaluator (Aircraft Test and Evaluation Centre (ATEC)) the Aircraft Release to Service Recommendations will be Endorsed by Director Helicopters and Forwarded to the MAA and the Army Release to Service Authority for Approval in April 2012 to Enable Flight by Service Personnel. a Planning Round 2012 Option is Being Run to Address the Incorporation of an Aircraft Collision Avoidance System to all Combat Helicopters Including Wildcat. This is to be Managed as a Separate Project. the Light Assault Helicopter Requirement is Subject to Ongoing Work to Inform the Approval Decision. if the Department Concludes During the Planning Process in 2012/13 that the LAH Capability is not Part of the Core Programme then Aircraft Numbers and Costs will be Amended to Reflect the Existing Requirement and this will be Shown in MPR13. Under the Contract Amendment to the Future Lynx Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture Contract, the Training Capital Equipment is Being Delivered by AgustaWestland Through Two Sub-Contractors: The Aircrew Training Equipment under Subcontract to Indra (Madrid) is Progressing to Schedule, but a Delay Has Recently Been Announced to the Maintenance Training Equipment Subcontract with Pennant. the Training Building Infrastructure is Running to Schedule. Following Approval in December 2011, AgustaWestland Were Awarded the Wildcat Integrated Support and Training (WIST) Contract on 26 January 2012 for Pricing Period 1 (to 31 March 2017) Within the Framework of a Through-Life, Single Source Contracting Arrangement with Integral Five Yearly Re-Pricing and Exit Strategies. the Contract Provides the Full Range of Technical and Materiel Support Services, a Support Management Organisation and a Training Service. Following the Establishment Phase, it will 'Go Live' to Support the First Aircraft Delivery from April 2012. Approval Was also Granted to Contract the Logistic Enablers which Includes the Initial Provisioning of Spares and Constitution of Deployable Spares Packs as Well as Funding for Support Activities Outside of Wildcat Integrated Support and Training, Such as Obsolescence Resolution and Out of Scope Spares, Required over the Period. the Support and Training Key Performance Indicators will be Reported on in MPR 13.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.5. Capability Risks

These Projects Provide Ongoing Light Helicopter Capability in the Land, Maritime & Littoral Environments, Beyond the Out of Service Dates of the Current Lynx Helicopter Fleet and Introduce an Enhanced Maritime & Littoral Attack Capability. the Reduction in Aircraft Quantities Arising from the Equipment Examination is Predicated Upon a more Versatile Design Solution Allowing both Aircraft Variants to be Utilised Across a Wider Range of Roles and Environments, but with some Minor Trade-Off Against the Achieved Performance. This will Place a Greater Necessity on the Need to Manage the Two Variants Within a Common in-Service Framework with Commonality Within the Defence Lines of Development.

The April 2011 Reduction of Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters from 34 to 30 will Reduce the Capacity in which to Meet the Requirement for Aviation Reconnaissance, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Intelligence Gathering in Land/Littoral Manoeuvre Operations but Remains Sufficient to Meet the Defence Requirement.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>westland Helicopters Ltd, Yeovil</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to

Manufacture</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee with a Maximum Price</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

The Main Investment Decision Point for Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy), which is to be Installed on the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft, Was Delayed in Year. This Was Due to the Need to Secure Approval from France. Discussions are Still on-Going, but are Dependent on the Outcome of the French Government's Spending Review that is Currently Being Undertaken. There will Now be at Least a 19 Month Gap Between the Existing Capability Leaving Service and the New Missile Being Available. the Department may Extend the Life of the Existing Missile to Mitigate the Gap.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>future Air to Surface Guided Weapons (Heavy)</Td>
<td>
The Approval Decision for the Procurement of Future Air to Surface Guided Weapons (Heavy) is Expected to Receive

IAC Approval in April 2012 with an ISD of January 2018</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Air to Surface Guided Weapons (Light)</Td>
<td>
The Approval Decision for the Procurement of Future Air to

Surface Guided Weapons (Light) Has not yet Been Made and Hence Its ISD is not yet Established</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>tactical Data Link</Td>
<td>
The Approval Decision for the Procurement of Tactical Data

Link Variant to be Fitted to Wildcat Has not yet Been Made and Hence Its in-Service Date is not yet Established.</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Wildcat Support and Training Solution Considered an Industry-Led Combined Training and Support Service to be Delivered under Integrated Operational Support Arrangements. the Industry Proposal Was Compared to a Value for Money Benchmark to Determine Value for Money and is Consistent with the Director Helicopters Common Support Framework for Integrated Operational Support. on Completion of Analysis, a Recommendation Was Made to the Investment Approvals Board via a Review Note which Received Approval in December 2011 and AgustaWestland Were Awarded the Wildcat Integrated Support and Training Contract on 26th January 2012. See Section A.4.

Enter Text Here</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>westland Helicopters Ltd, Yeovil</Td>
<td>in-Service Training and Support</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -
UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a Proportion of Total

Estimated

Procurement Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>59</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>4%</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>59</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>4%</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>
1669
</Td>
<td>
1803
</Td>
<td>
1867
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>1803</Td>
<td>1663</Td>
<td>-140</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>1803</Td>
<td>1663</Td>
<td>-140</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase B.3.1.1 Lynx Wildcat

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>increase in the Rate of VAT from 17.5% to 20%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>financial Year 2011/2012 InYear Overspend to Enable Consistent Financial Treatment of System Requirement Document Milestones.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>financial Year 2012/2013 Aproved Underspend as a Result of Overspend in Financial Year 2011/2012.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>approved Overspend for Financial Year 2011/2012 to Reflect Delayed Spend in Respect of Training Capital Equipment Building</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-12</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>financial Year 2010/2011 Inyear Saving to Reflect the Delay to Contract Let for the Construction of Training Capital Equipment Building</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-26</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>planning Round 11 Transfer to Balance Approved Overspend in Financial Year 2010/2011</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+26</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>approved Overspend for Financial Year 2010/2011 to Reflect Corrected Training Capital</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Accruals Position

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-10</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>planning Round Transfer to Amend Option E11AL041S</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+10</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>planning Round 11 Option E11AL041S - Revised Resource Profile</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-33</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>planning Round 11 Option (E11AL003S) to Reduce Lynx Wildcat Aircraft from 70 to 66</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+70</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>rotary Wing Strategy Funding to Increase the Number of Aircraft to be Procured from 62 to 70</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>change in Rate of VAT from 17.5% to 20% - Impact on Financial Year 2010/2011 Outturn</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>planning Round 2010 Option – Rotary Wing – Fuel System Survivability Measures.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>the Level of Risk which Has Materialised Has not Been as Great as Anticipated Within the Main Gate Business Case.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-8</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>lynx Wildcat Programme Cost Reduction Related to Funding Reprofiling Within Helicopter Cluster.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-194</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>planning Round 2009 Option – Lynx Wildcat Descope and Reduce Numbers from 80 to 62.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>-140</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
FALSE
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 66%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>increment Title</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>the April 2011 Reduction of Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters from 34 to 30 will Reduce the Capacity in which to Meet the Requirement for Aviation Reconnaissance, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Intelligence Gathering in Land/Littoral Manoeuvre Operations but Remains Sufficient to Meet the Defence Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>the Reduction in Aircraft Quantities Arising from the 2008 Equipment Examination is Predicated Upon a more Versatile Design Solution Allowing both Aircraft Variants to be Utilised Across the Range of Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter and Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Roles and Environments, but with some Minor Trade-Off Against the Achieved Performance. This will Place a Greater Necessity on the Need to Manage the Two Variants Within a Common in-Service Framework with Commonality Within the Defence Lines of Development.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>wildcat Integrated Support and Training</Td>
<td>314</Td>
<td>303</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>314</Td>
<td>303</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Lynx Wildcat

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-10
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>refinement of Initial Provisioning Requirements.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
December 2011
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>additional Risk to be Managed Through the Annual Financial Management Processes, Created as a Result of Changes to Cluster Manpower Structures Creating Further Uncertainty.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-11
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.2 Operational Impact on Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 66%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>increment Title</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March

2011 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>57</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>736</Td>
<td>228</Td>
<td>964</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>13</Td>
<td>13</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>793</Td>
<td>241</Td>
<td>1034</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat - Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>
December 2001
</Td>
<td>june 2006</Td>
<td>54</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat - Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>
September 2002
</Td>
<td>june 2006</Td>
<td>45</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat - Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>may 2013</Td>
<td>
January 2014
</Td>
<td>
August 2014
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat - Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>may 2014</Td>
<td>
January 2015
</Td>
<td>
August 2015
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat - Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>in-Service Date is Defined as 4 Force Elements at Readiness to Deploy on a Small Scale Focussed Intervention Operation.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat - Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>in-Service Date is Defined as One Deployable Aircraft with Logistic Support, Trained Aircrew and Ground Crew in Place.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat -
Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>january 2014</Td>
<td>august 2014</Td>
<td>+7</Td>
<td>+7</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat -
Surface Combatant Maritime</Td>
<td>january 2015</Td>
<td>january 2015</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Rotorcraft

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Lynx Wildcat - Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+7</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter 50% Confidence Date Has Been Moved from Jan 2014 to August 2014. This Revised Figure Has Resulted from a Recent Risk Review of the Key Enablers which are on the Critical Path for the in-Service Date. the 50% Confidence Delivery Forecasts for the Training Capital Equipment (TCE) (Aircrew and Maintainer) Have Been Revised in Light of Emerging Technical and Programme Risks, Recent Changes to Delivery Dates Published by the Prime and Sub-Contractors and Continued Manpower Resource Pressure Within the Project Team. for the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Fielding Plan and InService Date These Equipments are on Critical Path Hence the in-Service Date Has Moved Commensurately. the Revised Training Capital Equipment Delivery Dates are as Follows:
Full Mission Simulator - December 2013, Cockpit Procedures Trainer - February 2014, Aircraft Systems Trainer - November 2013 and Weapons &amp; Avionics - February 2014.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>since Main Gate, Project Advised that the New Treasury 4 Gate Approval Process for Candidate PFI Projects Needed to be Adopted. This Process Had the Potential to Add One Year to the Procurement Timescale for the Synthetic Training Service. Sufficiently Trained Aircrew are Required Before InService Date can be Declared and it Was Considered Prudent to Declare an in-Service Date Slip of 3 Months While Mitigation Work Matured.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>flight Simulation and Synthetic Trainers Integrated Project Team Lynx Wildcat Training Services Initial Gate Business Case Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in August 2007. the Required Mitigation Activity Has Been Completed and Has Brought the Training Service in-
Service Date in Line with the in-Service Date and the Three Months Recovered.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+7</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat -
Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>sufficient Aircraft and Trained Crews to Generate the Required Number of Sustainable Force Elements at Readiness; the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter is Compliant with the Endorsed Threshold User Requirement Document and the Legacy Lynx Marks 7 and 9 are No Longer Required to Contribute any Element of Support to the Delivery of Land or Littoral Manoeuvre Capability.</Td>
<td>
The in-Year Timescale Variation of the

In Service Date is not Anticipated to Affect the Achievement of Full Operating Capability, but is Still Being Assessed and will be Dependent on the Conclusions of the in Service

Date/Initial Operating Capability Impact Assessment Reported at
# C.3.5.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat -
Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>sufficient, Sustainable Trained Crews and Aircraft to Generate the Required Number of Force Elements at Readiness; the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft is Compliant with the Endorsed Threshold User Requirement Document and the Legacy Platform is No Longer Required to Contribute any Element of Maritime Capability.</Td>
<td>progress Continues Towards Full Operating Capability</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.2 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>since Main Gate, Project Advised that the New Treasury 4 Gate Approval Process for Candidate PFI Projects Needed to be Adopted. This Process Had the Potential to Add One Year to the Procurement Timescale for the Synthetic Training Service. Sufficiently Trained Aircrew are Required Before InService Date can be Declared and it Was Considered Prudent to Declare an in-Service Date Slip of 3 Months While Mitigation Work Matured.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>flight Simulation and Synthetic Trainers Integrated Project Team Future Lynx Training Services Initial Gate Business Case Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in August 2007. the Required Mitigation Activity Has Been Completed and Has Brought the Training Service in-
Service Date in Line with the in-Service Date and the Three Months Recovered.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>an Action Has Been Placed at the Wildcat Project Board to Establish the Operational Impact of this Training Capital Equipment Timescale Variation, Together with a Pan Defence Lines of Development Assessment of Progress and Risks to Report to the Project Board in September 2012.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.1 Scope of Support / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>scope</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>wildcat Integrated Support and Training</Td>
<td>the Logistic Support Date (LSD) is the Date, 3 Months in Advance of the Delivery of the First Aircraft, by which all of the Support Enablers Required to

Support the Aircraft are Either in Place or Confirmed will be in Place for the First Aircraft Delivery. Many Individual Elements of LSD Were Contracted under the

D&amp;M Contract. However, the Key LSD Deliverable is the Platform Support Solution, for Wildcat this is the Wildcat Integrated Support and Training (WIST) Contract. from Contract Award 26 January 2012 to First Aircraft Delivery on 16 April 2012, WIST is in Its Establishment Phase, Such that it will be Operational from the Date of the First Aircraft Delivery to the MOD 'Go Live' Date.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>wildcat Integrated Support and Training</Td>
<td>april 2012</Td>
<td>april 2012</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation

## C.5.3 Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract End Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>wildcat Integrated Support and Training</Td>
<td>march 2017</Td>
<td>march 2017</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation

## C.5.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Support Cost Variation
## C.5.5 Operational Impact of Support / PFI Support Contract Variation

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
62% AMBER
</Td>
<td>
78% GREEN
</Td>
<td>slippage in Wildcat Army Helicopter Release to Service 1 (Training) from 29 February 2012 to 23 April 2012. Declared Slippage of Army Helicopter in Service Date 50% Date from January 2014 to August 2014.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

## D.2.1 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters

### D.2.1.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>the Provision of the Wildcat Helicopter Platform, Including Systems and Weapons, Expendable and Nonexpendable, Needed to Outfit/Equip Respective Army and Royal Navy Services to the Required Performance Specification.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>the Wildcat Training Solution will Deliver Appropriately Qualified Personnel, to Allow Front Line Commands to Generate the Force Elements at Readiness Required for Contingent Tasks in Accordance with their Respective Army and Royal Navy</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>the Logistics DLoD Covers the Provision of the Logistic Support Solution Required to Sustain the Wildcat Mk 1 Fleet Capability until the Out of Service Date, to Levels Specified in the Joint Business Agreement with both Joint Helicopter Command and Navy Command.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>the Infrastructure DLoD Embraces the Investment Required in the UK MoD Estate to Deliver the Infrastructure Necessary to Support Wildcat Capability, Associated Equipments and Personnel. an Embarked Infrastructure Sub-DLoD to Cover Embarked Wildcat Operations is also Considered.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>the Timely Provision of Sufficient, Capable, Trained, Equipped and Motivated Personnel to Deliver Defence Outputs, both Now and in the Future for Wildcat Operations.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>the Concepts and Doctrine DLoD for both Army and Royal Navy Variants of the Wildcat Mk1 Aircraft to Full Operational Capability is Bounded By: The Need to Provide a Timely, Coherent and Dynamic Concept of Use (CONUSE) for Each Variant; and Devise and Deliver Relevant and Updated Tactical Doctrine, Including Tactics, Techniques and Procedures, for Wildcat Training And, Ultimately, Operational Flying.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>establish an Operational and Nonoperational Organisational Relationships of People for the Wildcat Force. It Typically Includes Military Force Structures, MoD Civilian Organisational Structures and Defence Contractors Providing Support.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>the Information DLOD is Concerned with the Contribution that Data, Information and Knowledge Make to Wildcat Operational Capability.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (5)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (4)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>see Detail in Battlefield Helicopter Reconnaissance KUR Table
### D.3.1.2 Comments. This Refers to the De-Scope of Bowman Data Communications.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>post the Strategic Defence and Security Review, Funding and Manning Constraints Place Risk on the Ability of the Front Line Commands to Support Wildcat, Particularly for the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>training Proposal Lacks Pricing Information &amp; Uncertainty from Contractor as to when this will be Available. Risk in Meeting Approvals Timescales Due to Election/Summer Recess. MPR2011: Training Capital

Equipment Contract Placed 4 February

2011. Affordability Challenges with Training Delivery Proposal Caused Delay to Contract Award. a Phased Approach to Introduction of Training is Being Followed.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>support Proposal Lacks Pricing Information &amp; Uncertainty from Contractor as to when this will be Available. Risk in Meeting Approvals Timescales Due to Election/Summer Recess. MPR2011: Industry Support Solution Proposal Received Early 2011. Affordability Discussions Ongoing. Logistic Support Date will be Achieved Through a Phased Introduction of Support.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Wildcat Infrastructure Team Now Formed and Managing Implementation.

Funding Issues Remain. Approvals Timelines Co-Incident with Election and may Lead to Planning Blight.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
Force Structure Guidance Now Provided and Levels of Manning Identified.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>full Infrastructure Requirement not yet Clear: Awaiting Detailed Proposal for Training and Logistics (Support Solution).

Awaiting Clarity on Funding Availability.

MPR2011: Funding Profile Issues Remain, Complicated by Uncertainty While Awaiting Outcome of Strategic Defence and Security Review, Planning Round 11 and Rotary Wing Strategy Implementation.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>manning Process Agreed. Awaiting Personnel Requirement from Organisation and Training Line of Development.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft

~d.2.2.1~ Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>the Provision of the Wildcat Helicopter Platform, Including Systems and Weapons, Expendable and Nonexpendable, Needed to Outfit/Equip Respective Army and Royal Navy Services to the Required Performance Specification.</Td>
<td>yes(with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>the Wildcat Training Solution will Deliver Appropriately Qualified Personnel, to Allow Front Line Commands to Generate the Force Elements at Readiness Required for Contingent Tasks in Accordance with their Respective Army and Royal Navy Plans.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>the Logistics DLoD Covers the Provision of the Logistic Support Solution Required to Sustain the Wildcat Mk 1 Fleet Capability until the Out of Service Date, to Levels Specified in the Joint Business Agreement with both Joint Helicopter Command and Navy C</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>the Infrastructure DLoD Embraces the Investment Required in the UK MoD Estate to Deliver the Infrastructure Necessary to Support Wildcat Capability, Associated Equipments and Personnel. an Embarked Infrastructure Sub-DLoD to Cover Embarked Wildcat Operati</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>the Timely Provision of Sufficient, Capable, Trained, Equipped and Motivated Personnel to Deliver Defence Outputs, both Now and in the Future for Wildcat Operations.</Td>
<td>yes(with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>the Concepts and Doctrine DLoD for both Army and Royal Navy Variants of the Wildcat Mk1 Aircraft to Full Operational Capability is Bounded By: The Need to Provide a Timely, Coherent and Dynamic Concept of Use (CONUSE) for Each Variant; and Devise and Deli</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>establish an Operational and Nonoperational Organisational Relationships of People for the Wildcat Force. It Typically Includes Military Force Structures, MoD Civilian Organisational Structures and Defence Contractors Providing Support.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>the Information DLOD is Concerned with the Contribution that Data, Information and Knowledge Make to Wildcat Operational Capability.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (2)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (4)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>no Longer at Risk. Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Training not Required until January 2014; Synthetic Training Equipment Delay Has No Impact on this Delivery.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>see Detail in Battlefield Helicopter Reconnaissance KUR Table
### D.3.1.2 Comments. This Refers to the De-Scope of Bowman Data Communications. Lack of Clarity over Uniformed Support</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>manning Requirement at Main Operating Base and Within Defence Equipment &amp; Support Places the Ability of Front Line Commands to Supply Personnel at Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>no Longer at Risk - Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Infrastructure Option Downselected.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>no Longer at Risk. Support Contract Signed January 2012. Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Logs Enablers not Required until October 2012 and will Allready be in Place to Support Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter First Delivery in May 2012.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
Personnel
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>post the Strategic Defence and Security Review, Funding and Manning Constraints Place Risk on the Ability of the Front Line Commands to Support Wildcat, Particularly for the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>training Proposal Lacks Pricing Information &amp; Uncertainty from Contractor as to when this will be Available. Risk in Meeting Approvals Timescales Due to Election/Summer Recess. MPR2011: Training Capital Equipment Contract Placed 4 February 2011. Affordability Challenges with Training Delivery Proposal Caused Delay to Contract Award. a Phased Approach to Introduction of Training is Being Followed.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>logistics</Th>
<th>procurement Processes</Th>
<th>support Proposal Lacks Pricing Information &amp; Uncertainty from Contractor as to when this will be Available. Risk in Meeting Approvals Timescales Due to Election/Summer Recess. MPR2011:
Industry Support Solution Proposal Received Early 2011. Affordability Discussions are Ongoing. Logistic Support Date will be Achieved Through a Phased Introduction of Support.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>wildcat Infrastructure Team Now Formed and Managing Implementation. Funding Issues Remain. Approvals Timelines Co-Incident with Election and may Lead to Planning Blight.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>force Structure Guidance Now Provided and Levels of Manning Identified.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>full Infrastructure Requirement not yet Clear: Awaiting Detailed Proposal for Training and Logistics (Support Solution). Awaiting Clarity on Funding Availability. MPR2011:
Funding Profile Issues Remain, Complicated by Uncertainty While Awaiting Outcome of Strategic Defence and Security Review, Planning Round 11 and Rotary Wing Strategy Implementation.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>manning Process Agreed. Awaiting Personnel Requirement from Organisation and Training Line of Development.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Lynx Wildcat - Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicoper

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Requires a Manned Rotorcraft Capable of Independent and Co-Operative, Intelligent Action, which Provides Commanders with a Sustainable, Timely, Responsive and Accurate, Enduring Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability at Long Range Across the Full Spectrum of Conflict.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>02</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Requires the Capability to Acquire, Designate Targets and Direct the Full Spectrum of Joint Fires via Network Enabled Communications.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>03</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level of Operational Effect.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>04</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Deliver Operational Capability with a High Likelihood of Survival.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>05</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interoperate with Relevant Military and Civil Authorities.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>06</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall Have a Capability that can Operate Within Defined Natural and Manmade Environmental Conditions.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate from both Land and Sea Bases to Target Areas on Land or Sea.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Deployed Worldwide.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Current Forecast (Wi
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">th Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (2)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Last Year’s Forecast
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">(with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (2)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>02</Td>
<td>change in Associated Project</Td>
<td>one of the Elements (Targeting) of this Key Performance Measure is Considered to be at Risk as the Release of Bowman Software (Bowman Combat and Infrastructure Platform 6.0.) that Would Have Enabled Integration of Bowman Data Onto Wildcat is not Funded. Alternatives Have Been Identified and are Being Scoped. This Functionality is not Required until Full Operating Capabilty</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>08</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>one of the Five Elements of this Key Performance Measure (Self-Deploy) Was Traded-Out by the 2008 Equipment Examination.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>02</Td>
<td>to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td>the Ability to Achieve some Missions is Degraded without Bowman Data, but Alternative Solutions will Minimise this Impact.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>08</Td>
<td>to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td>there is a Minimal Operational Impact from this Key Performance Measure Trade, in that Only a Small Number of the Mission Scenarios are Affected. Should Funding be Identified at a Later Date, this Capability Could be Reintroduced to the Design Solution.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3.2 Lynx Wildcat - Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Requires a Manned Rotorcraft Capable of Independent and Co-Operative, Intelligent Action, which Provides Commanders with a Sustainable, Timely, Responsive and Accurate, Enduring Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>02</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Requires the Capability to Acquire, Designate Targets and Direct the Full Spectrum of Joint Fires via Network Enabled Communications.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>03</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Autonomously and Co-Operatively Attack using Appropriate Rapid and Flexible Fires with the Joint Battlespace.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>04</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Requires a Vertical Lift Capability to Deploy and Support Joint Forces, as Operationally Effective Units, from Land or Sea</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>05</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level of Operational Effect.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>06</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Deliver Operational Capability with a High Likelihood of Survival.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interoperate with Relevant Military and Civilian Authorities.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The User Shall Have a Capability that can Operate Within Defined Natural and Manmade Environmental Conditions.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate from both Land and Sea Bases to Target Areas on Land or Sea.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Deployed Worldwide.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Current Forecast (Wi
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">th Risks)</Td>
<td>
10 (4)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Last Year’s Forecast
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">(with Risks)</Td>
<td>
10 (4)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>03</Td>
<td>change in Associated Project</Td>
<td>one of the Elements of this Key Performance Measure is Considered to be at Risk, Due to Rescheduling of Team Complex Weapons Approval Milestones &amp; a Delay in Achieving Future Air-to-Surface Guided Weapons (Heavy) Co-Operative Funding from France Resulting in the Aircraft &amp; Weapons Programmes Potentially Being Misaligned. Work is Currently Underway to Examine the Extent of the Issue &amp; Establish Mitigation.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>07</Td>
<td>change in Associated Project</Td>
<td>one of the Elements (Transfer of Secure Data Line-of-Sight Information to a Third Party) of this Key Performance Measure is Considered to be at Risk Due to Lack of Tactical Data Link Funding. the Option to Fund the Link22 for Wildcat Was not Taken Forward in Planning Round 2011.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>01</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>the 2008 Equipment Examination Put `at Risk` the Surveillance/Reach Element of this Key Performance Measure.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>one of the Five Elements of this Key Performance Measure (Self-Deploy) Has Been Traded-Out by the Equipment Examination.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>01</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>one of the Ten Elements of this Key Performance Measure is Considered to be at Risk. the Contracted Position, with Respect to the Installed Radar Detection Performance, Does not Meet the Key Performance Measure. Work is Ongoing Between the Integrated Project Team and Agusta Westland to Evaluate the Extent of the Shortfall.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>03</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>failure to Provide a Future Air-toSurface Guided Weapons Capability Synchronous with Initial Operating Capability will Mean Significant Elements of Attack Capability will not be Available in Several Mission Scenarios. These Core Attack Missions are Dependent Upon the Ability to Deliver a Proportional &amp; Autonomous Attack Capability for which Future Air-toSurface Guided Weapons (Light) &amp; (Heavy) Variants are Fundamental.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>07</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>failure to Provide a Tactical Data Link Capability at Initial Operating Capability, and Thus a Significant Reduction in the Ability to Exchange Secure Data with Third Parties, will Place Elements of Targeting &amp; Interoperability Key Performance Measures at Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>01</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>there is a Minimal Operational Impact from this Key Performance Measure Trade, in that Only a Small Number of the Mission Scenarios are Affected. Should Funding be Identified at a Later Date, this Capability Could be Reintroduced to the Design Solution.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>there is a Minimal Operational Impact from this Key Performance Measure Trade, in that Only a Small Number of the Mission Scenarios are Affected. Should Funding be Identified at a Later Date, this Capability Could be Reintroduced to the Design Solution.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>01</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>there is a Minimal Operational Impact from this Variation, in that Only a Small Number of the Mission Scenarios are Affected. the Shortfall is Balanced by Improvements in Other Aspects of Performance.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.4. Support Contract
