---
year: 2010.0
project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
project: Maritime Afloat and Reach Sustainability
page_from: 43.0
page_to: 46.0
project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2010_43_46.md
---
Team Responsible

AFLOAT SUPPORT

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Number of Projects / Increments

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision – \[Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability\]

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

## A.1. The Requirement

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability programme will provide afloat logistic support to UK and allied maritime task groups at sea and their amphibious components operating ashore. Although not strictly a one-for-one replacement programme, new vessels will incrementally replace much of the existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary flotilla, as ships enter and leave service respectively.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability capability is designed to support three distinct types of maritime task group: Carrier Strike, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Security. The demands of each differ significantly, but are all composed of three common elements:

Bulk Consumables - fuel and potable water which are transferred by hose.

Non-bulk consumables - Food, ammunition and general stores. Solid cargo which is transferred in unit loads, either ship to ship or ship to shore.

Forward Aviation Support - The provision of helicopter basing and operating facilities to accommodate some of the task group’s aircraft or to provide operational flexibility during a campaign.

An early decision was taken to base the system solution on three classes of ship:

Tanker - Bulk consumables and Forward Aviation Support for all task groups. Limited nonbulk consumables capacity to support the small Maritime Security groups. Fleet Solid Support Ship - Non-bulk consumables and Forward Aviation Support, optimised for the Carrier Strike group.

Amphibious Combat Stores Ship – previously referred to as Joint Sea-Based Logistics Ship - Non-bulk consumables and Forward Aviation Support, optimised for the Littoral Manoeuvre group.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability capability will be in service until around 2047 and as such the solution will be designed to accommodate the requirements of current and known future force structures, including Type 45, the Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers, Joint Combat Aircraft and Future Surface Combatant .

The capability to be provided is essential to the evolving logistic support needs of the Royal Navy. The proposed procurement profile of Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability ships has been matched to this need, the initial focus being on the double-hulled Fleet Tankers which are required in order to comply with International Maritime environmental standards.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability programme received formal approval to enter its Assessment Phase in July 2005 based on an Alliance strategy.

Between March and September 2007, the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability procurement strategy was reviewed to reflect the need to procure the Tanker element of the programme in order to comply with International Maritime legislation. The Alliance strategy and the competition to choose an Integrator was terminated in May 2007. In December 2007, Ministerial approval was given for a new strategy based on a ‘Competitive and

Adaptive’ approach and an open competition was launched for the design and build of up to six Fleet Tankers. In addition, Minister approved the designation and delegation of the Heavy Replenishment at Sea project as a separate Category D project. Fleet Solid Support and Amphibious Combat Stores will now form a separate strategy to be considered with wider UK industrial interests.

The approved budget for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase is £44m and the current forecast for the Assessment Phase, including early design and requirement work for Fleet Solid Support and Amphibious Combat Stores vessels is \\\
(Tanker\\\, Fleet Solid Support, \\\ and Amphibious Combat Stores, \\\.

Due to the planned phased nature of the project, support and oversight for MARS Tankers and further design work on subsequent classes will take place after the MARS Tanker main investment decision, and the current total forecast for this later work is \\\, \\\ for MARS Tankers,\\\ for Fleet Solid Support and \\\for Amphibious Combat Stores vessels) bringing the total expected cost of Assessment work and later design for future classes to \\\ In May 2008, the Secretary of State for Defence announced that four bidders had been shortlisted for the next stage of the competition. They were Navantia (Spain); Fincantieri (Italy), Hyundai Heavy Industries (Republic of Korea) and a consortium led by BVT(UK) with BMT and Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (Republic of Korea). Initial bids were received.

Between May and December 2008 the Department carried out an examination of its equipment programme. As a result of this examination the Secretary of State for Defence announced that there was scope for considering alternative approaches for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability programme likely to involve the deferral of the Tanker element. The competition was formally closed in March 2009. A review of the requirements and procurement strategy was undertaken. This review concluded that a more open procurement strategy that considers a range of possible solutions and which take account of current market conditions is more likely to secure best value for money for the MOD.

## A.3. Progress

Following Ministerial approval a new competition was launched in October 2009. Following assessment of Pre Qualification Questionnaires six companies have been invited to proceed to the next stage of the competition. The companies are: A&P Group Limited (UK), Daewoo

Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (Republic of Korea), Fincantieri (Itay), Flensburger Schiffbau-Gesellschaft (Germany), Hyundai Heavy Industries (Republic of Korea) and Knutsen OAS(UK) Limited.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability programme will deliver future Royal

Fleet Auxiliary ships, replacing the current capability, to support the future Royal Navy. Without the support of these ships, the ability of the Royal Navy to carry out global operations will be severely restricted. Double hulled naval tankers are required as soon as is practicable to comply with international maritime legislation; the Royal Fleet Auxiliary currently operates two double hulled tankers and six single hulled tankers under exemption from legislation. All Royal Fleet Auxiliary ships are maintained to UK regulatory and classifications standards; should this certification and classification be withdrawn for single hulled tankers, their operation would cease immediately leading to severe operational limitations on the ability of the Royal Navy to operate worldwide and in anything but the most benign environments. Foreign nations have already begun to deny port access for single hulled tankers and this situation will be exacerbated as a consequence of any environmental incident, MOD shipping related or not. Programming for operations takes account of environmental restrictions as well as limitations on ships due to their material state; for example some of the older ships are unable to operate in colder climates due to the steel in their ageing hulls becoming brittle. These ships will be replaced as the double hulled tanker element of the MARS Programme is delivered.

## A.5. Associated Projects – Not applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="4">Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>MARS Tanker</td>
<td colspan="4">International Competition, Competitive Dialogue</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – Not Applicable

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</td>
<td>44</td>
<td><a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>44</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Includes forecasted  for post Main Gate Assessment work that is not yet approved. The actual Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase expenditure is within budget.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</td>
<td>
2782
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
3888
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – Not applicable

2.  Unit production cost – not applicable

3.  Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not applicable

4.  Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Previous expenditure to 31 March 2009</th>
<th>In-year expenditure</th>
<th>Total expenditure to 31 March 2010</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase (£m)</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure (£m)</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</td>
<td></td>
<td>July 2005</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 38%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast / Approved
</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>Latest Forecast / Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – not applicable

2.  Full Operating Capability – not applicable

3.  Support / Service / PFI Contract – not applicable

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  <u>Section D: Performance – not applicable</u>
