---
year: 2007.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: INDIRECT FIRE PRECISION ATTACK (IFPA)
page_from: 189.0
page_to: 190.0
project_label: Indirect Fire Precision Attack
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2007_189_190.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

INDIRECT FIRE PRECISION ATTACK (IFPA)

Picture not available

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

ARTILLERY SYSTEMS

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

Indirect Fire Precision Attack (IFPA) will provide a suite of munitions for indirect precision attack of static, mobile, and manoeuvring targets, by incremental acquisition, extending to ranges in excess of 150 kilometres.

The capability required under IFPA will be delivered through a structured programme of Assessment, Demonstration and Manufacture phases. In light of the incremental nature of the programme, a revised approach to the overall IFPA strategy has been agreed with approval for a continuing Assessment Phase leading to the procurement of individual components via a series of Main Gate Business Cases.

The Assessment Phase is indicating that the IFPA capability is expected to be achieved by a mixture of guided rockets, enhanced artillery shells and Loitering Munitions, using a variety of different payloads (Loitering Munitions are unmanned airborne vehicles with a warhead, designed to fly in a holding pattern after launching until deployed, with a man-in-the-loop controller, to a target). IFPA munitions will be used by the Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS), the AS90 self-propelled howitzer, the future Lightweight Mobile Artillery Weapon System (LIMAWS) Rocket Launcher and in the case of Loitering Munitions possibly as a stand-alone platform. The mix of munitions procured under the programme will have a range of In-Service Dates, with the first being 155mm Ballistic Sensor Fused Munition. This multi-solution approach will be managed through an incrementally based procurement strategy.

183

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e Main gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Initial Gate Business Case for IFPA was approved in May 2001. Following competition using a Capability Based Questionnaire, an Assessment Phase contract was awarded in May 2002 to a consortium of companies led by BAE Systems Future Systems. The Assessment Phase was designed

to provide, and iteratively update, a ‘Route Map’ to achieving the full IFPA capability with recommendations about the type, quantities and mix of munitions.

In line with the approved IFPA strategy for an incremental programme, a series of Assessment Phases will be conducted, each being approved by a separate Review Note. A contract for the second Assessment Phase was placed with the BAE Systems Future Systems led consortium in January 2007, which included the Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration (LMCD).

Invitations to Tender for a 155mm Ballistic Sensor Fused Munition Demonstration and Manufacture phase contract were issued in July 2005. Contract award is expected in Summer 2007.

In light of the incremental procurement strategy, procurement of subsequent components will be approved via a series of Main Gate Business Cases.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
67<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
24<a href="fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+43
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Includes costs for Assessment Phase 2 and Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration of £49m which was approved in June 2006 review note.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
<li id="fn2">Covers approvals of Assessment Phase 1. Due to incremental nature of this programme this approval does not include other assessment phase activities.<a href="fnref2"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Latest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">This project will provide the MoD with an indirect fire, precision attack capability, to be acquired on an incremental basis. The above dates relate to the current planning assumptions for the first increment of the IFPA programme, that is, the introduction into service of the 155mm Ballistic Sensor Fused Munition.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

184
