---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Chinook New Buy
Page_from: 96.0
Page_to: 113.0
Project_label: Chinook New Buy
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_96_113.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Chinook New Buy
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Chinook Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Wayne Keble (Air and Littoral Manoeuvre Capability)
</Td>
<td>01 February 2011 01 March 2013</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects / Increments
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Chinook New Buy Julius
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision TRUE Decision FALSE</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
The UK Currently Has a Fleet of 46 Chinook, Delivered Between 1981 and 2001. Project New Buy:
The New Rotary Wing Strategy, Announced by the Secretary of State in December 2009, Established that the Future Heavy Lift Capability Would be Provided by the Chinook Helicopter. the Rotary Wing Strategy Set Out the Intention to Buy an Additional 22 New Chinook, in Addition to the Replacement for the Two Aircraft Destroyed on Operations in Afghanistan in August 2009 (for which Approval will be Sought Through the HM Treasury Reserve), that Would Take the Chinook Fleet Upto 70 Aircraft. Operational Analysis Has Routinely Identified the Unique Strength of Capability Provided by Chinook. the Most Recent Lift Advanced Concept Phase 3 Analysis Provides Clear Evidence of the Need for a Greater Number of Chinook Helicopters. However, Operational Analysis Has not Identified an Obvious Blend of Helicopter Types that is Affordable, Cost-Effective, and which Meets all Our Helicopter Requirements. Chinook Delivers more Capability for a Given Investment than Smaller Types, and Hence the Earlier this Rebalancing can Occur, the Faster Overall UK Helicopter Capability can be Increased. in Sept 2010 the Strategic Defence and Security Review Reduced the Requirement to 14 Aircraft (12+ 2 Attrition Aircraft to Replace Those Lost in Afghanistan in 2009). Project JULIUS:
An Urgent Operational Requirement Was Introduced in 2002 to Enhance the Operational Capability of the Chinook During Night-Time Operations in Iraq. the Night Enhancement Package Was Fitted to Eight Chinook Mk2/2a Aircraft, and Was Intended to Fill a Short-Term Gap until the Introduction of the Delayed Chinook Mk3 to Provide Heavy-Lift Helicopter Capability Specifically for Special Forces. in September 2004 a "Fix-to-Field" Project for the Eight Chinook Mk3 Aircraft Commenced. the Proposed Solution to Meet the Special Forces Requirement Was to Modify the Cockpit Display Systems, Together with Integration of Special Operations Equipment and a Comprehensive Defensive Aids Suite. in June 2005, under the Auspice of the Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme, a Land Advanced Concept Phase Was Initiated to Determine the Most Cost-Effective and Balanced Fleet of Future Rotorcraft Lift Platforms. Subsequently, it Was Decided to Adopt an Incremental Approval Strategy; Increment 2

<sup>enter Text Here</Sup>presented Options to Address the Balance of Special Forces Heavy Lift Requirement. It Was Assumed that Fix-to-Field Would Still Deliver Eight Mk3 Special Forces Aircraft.

In March 2007 the Fix-to-Field Project Was Cancelled in Favour of a Project to Revert the Chinook Mk3 Aircraft to a Standard Similar as the Mk2/2a. the Imperative Was to Make Helicopters Available for Operations in Afghanistan as Quickly as Possible. the JULIUS Project Was Therefore Conceived to Modify Eight Chinook Mk2/2a Aircraft and Convert Them from a Support Helicopter Standard into a Special Forces Variant, to be Designated Mk4/4a. the Main Changes to the Aircraft Were to be the Incorporation of an Integrated Glass Cockpit, Moving Map Tablet and a Crewman’s Workstation. the Joint Capabilities Board Later Decided to Increase the Flexibility of the Current Chinook Fleet by Moving to Fit all of the Fleet with the JULIUS Modification, to Deliver a 48 Aircraft Coherent Fleet, so that Aircraft Could more Easily ‘swing Role’ Between Special Forces and Support Helicopter Tasks, Thus Obviating the Need to Acquire the Additional Six Aircraft for Special Forces that Had Been Planned under Land Advanced Concept Phase Increment 2.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project New Buy:
In March 2010 Initial Gate Approval for the Chinook New Buy Project Was Granted to Conduct an Assessment Phase at a Total Cost of £67m (50% Confidence). This Funding Approval Assumed that a Main Gate Business Case Would be Presented in December 2010, and that a Demonstration and Manufacture Contract Would be Placed Shortly Thereafter. in May 2010 the Investment Approvals Board Endorsed a Review Note to Down-Select to a Preferred Configuration for the New Chinooks. the Configuration Selected Was the CH-47f Equipped with a Development of the Thales JULIUS Cockpit and a Digital Automatic Flight Control System and Current UK Chinook Theatre Entry Standard Modifications. in January 2011, Subsequent to Strategic Defence and Security Review Announcements, and the Delay to a Main Gate Decision for New Buy Chinook, a Review Note Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board Seeking an Uplift of £29m to the Approval to Sustain Critical Path Activity and Protect all Delivery Options to the End of May 2011. However, the Investment Approvals Board Only Approved an Uplift of £6.5m to Fund Programme Activity to the End of March 2011 and Requested Further Advice in Early March, Assuming the Defence Board and Ministers Had Determined the Way Forward on Chinook in the Context of the Wider Planning Round. in April 2011 the Department's Latest Financial Plan Captured the Defence Board's Direction to Pursue a 14 Chinook Aircraft Programme that Would See the First Flight in Quarter One of 2013 and all Aircraft Delivered by End of 2015. HM Treasury Approved an Investment Approvals Board Uplift to the Assessment Phase of £23.4m. in July 2011 a Further Uplift of £47.1m, to Extend the Assessment Phase to October 2011, Was Approved. However, Subsequently HM Treasury Approved the Main Gate Business Case on the 20th July 2011. Key Milestones Were Approved as Follows: Entry into Service of One Aircraft Delivered to the UK with an Interim Release to Service in May 2014; an Initial Operating Capability of Three Aircraft Available for Worldwide Deployment in January 2015.

Project JULIUS: Enter Text Here

In November 2007 HMT Declined to Fund the Modification Programme from the Conflict Prevention Fund and the Joint Capabilities Board Decided that the Urgent Operational Requirement Should be Departmentally Funded. in April 2008 the JULIUS Project Was Formally Initiated and a Sole-Source Procurement Strategy for Eight Aircraft Was Endorsed with Boeing as Prime Contractor using Thales Cockpit Displays. in December 2008 the Main Gate Business Case to Modify Eight Aircraft to the JULIUS Standard Was Approved. the Initial Operating Capability Was Defined as Two Aircraft Available for Deployment at the Required Capability with all Defence Lines of Development in Place Including Simulator, Out of Four Aircraft Delivered, by September 2011 (50%
Confidence Level).
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project New Buy:
A Full Firm Price Demonstration and Manufacture Contract Was Signed with Boeing on the 29th July 2011. in September 2011 the Platform Critical Design Review Was Successfully Passed. Completing the Review Was a Major Milestone Towards Achieving an Agreed Design Baseline and Providing Assurance that the Project Was on-Track. in March 2012 the Cabin and Aft Structures for the First Aircraft (Tail Number ZK550) Were Built and the Aircraft Moved to Final Assembly. a Senior Boeing/MoD Independent Programme Review Took Place in March 2012 and Concluded that There Were Additional Risks Surrounding the Integration of the Digital Auto Flight Control System and that the Flight Test Schedule, Whilst Adequate in Flying Hours, Provides Limited Scope in Programme Timescale to Address any Issues Identified During Flight Test. as a Consequence, We Have Now Declared a Delay in Entry into Service of Six Months to November 2014 to Accommodate These Additional Risks. Project JULIUS:
A Demonstration and Manufacture Contract Was Placed on 29th January 2009 with Boeing as the Prime Contractor, and Based on the Thales ‘top Deck’ Glass Cockpit Solution. the Through-Life Customer Support Partnering Contract with Boeing Was Used as the Tasking Arrangement. in July 2009 the Main Gate Business Case to Modify the Rest of the Chinook Fleet (Remaining 40 Aircraft at the Time) Was Approved. in August 2009 Two Chinook Aircraft Were Destroyed on Operations in Afghanistan. Rather than Reduce the JULIUS Approval by Two Aircraft Sets, the Subsequent New Buy Approval Was Abated by the Same Amount. in June 2011, During Test and Evaluation, Issues with Software, Firmware and Electromagnetic Compatibility Surfaced that Necessitated a Forecast Delay of Three Months to Initial Operating Capability. the 50% Confidence Date Was Now Reported as December 2011. in August the JULIUS 8 and 40 Projects Were Merged, and Going Forward Project Performance will be

<sup>enter Text Here</Sup>reported Against Julius as a Whole.

In October 2011 a Reappraisal of Technical Risks and Delivery Timescales Concluded that a Further Design Iteration Was Required. Consequently, an Intense Period of Rig and Flight Testing Began to Resolve the Following Primary Issues: Vertical Speed Indicators (VSI) Analogue to Digital Conversion;
Electromagnetic Compatibility of the Multi Function Displays; and Mission Management System Functionality. the Initial Operating Capability Was Forecast to be Delayed to May 2012. in March 2012 an Issue with How the Aircraft’s Height Relative to the Surrounding Terrain is Displayed in the Cockpit Emerged During Release to Service Activity. Consequently, the Forecast for Initial Operating Capability Was Delayed by a Further 11 Months, to April 2013.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Project New Buy:

Key Scheduled Activities Have Been Completed, Including: Delivery of Software Releases from Thales; Government Furnished Assets Working Group Held; Test and Evaluation Working Groups Held in Preparation for the Test Readiness Review. Aircraft Continue to be Built on the Production Line. as of the End of May 2012, Aircraft 4 Was at the Cabin Cockpit Splice Stage and Aircraft 3 Cabin Had Been Painted.

Project JULIUS:

The Mk 4 Release to Service Was Signed by Assistant Chief of the Air Staff on the 11th May 2012, Enabling Aircrew to Begin Training on the Aircraft. Aircrew Training is Underway to Support Operations and Initial Operating Capability Was Achieved on June 15th 2012, Against the Initial Approval of September 2011. as of the End of May 2012, MOD Had Accepted 5 Aircraft in Total. the Overarching Project Remains on Schedule to Meet Its Full Operating Capability in October 2015.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Project New Buy:

There is an Urgent Need to Replace Those Aircraft Recently Lost on Operations and to Build MOD's CH-47 Capability in Theatre to Allow for the Withdrawal of Sea King Mk4. Further Investment will be Required to Address Obsolescence and Sustain the Chinook Fleet to the Planned Out of Service Date of 2040.

Project JULIUS:

The Requirement Stemmed from the Need to Operate in Low Ambient Light Conditions in Afghanistan and Addressing the Safety and Airworthiness Concerns of the Current Night Enhancement Package.

## A.6. Associated Projects

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="4">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Chinook New Buy
</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Julius
</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="4">post-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Chinook New Buy
</Td>
<td>boeing</Td>
<td>
Demonstration and Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Firm Price
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

International</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Julius
</Td>
<td>boeing</Td>
<td>
Demonstration and Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Firm Price
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
Since May 2006, the in-Service Chinook Fleet Has Been Successfully Supported Through a Spares-Inclusive Availability Based Contract with Boeing, Known as Through-Life Customer Support. the Second Five-Year Pricing Period of Through-Life Customer Support Commenced in 2011. an Amendment Has Been Made to this Contract to Incrementally Include the New Standard of Aircraft (Mk4) as the Fleet Changes Configuration. an Amendment will also be Made to this Contract to Incrementally Include the New Aircraft (Mk6) as They Enter the Fleet. Through-Life Customer Support is the Most Cost-Effective Way of Delivering Support to Chinook and Has Consistently Demonstrated Value for Money in Line with Increased Operational Output.

Enter Text Here</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>through Life Customer Support (TLCS)</Td>
<td>
Boeing
</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -
International
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy<sup>1</Sup></Td>
<td>11</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>11</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>budgeted for (£m)</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy</Td>
<td>
796
</Td>
<td>
841
</Td>
<td>
891
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>julius</Td>
<td>
256
</Td>
<td>
280
</Td>
<td>
309
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy</Td>
<td>841</Td>
<td>841</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>julius</Td>
<td>280</Td>
<td>280</Td>
<td>+0</Td>
<td>+0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>1121</Td>
<td>1121</Td>
<td>+0</Td>
<td>+0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>through Life Chinook Support</Td>
<td>391</Td>
<td>386</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>new Buy Support</Td>
<td>84</Td>
<td>84</Td>
<td>+0</Td>
<td>+0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
475
</Td>
<td>
470
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Through Life Chinook Support

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>through Life Customer Support PP2 (Pricing Period 2) Risk not Materialised in Year 1.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.4.1.2 New Buy Support

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2011 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>10</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>174</Td>
<td>162</Td>
<td>336</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>62</Td>
<td>62</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>184</Td>
<td>224</Td>
<td>408</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1

The Assessment Phase Cost Reported is Lower than that Reported in Major Projects Report 2011. This is Because when the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Was Approved, the Approval Included some Money that Was Originally Approved as Part of the Assessment Phase Approval. These Costs are Now Included at B.2 and B.3.

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>july 2011</Td>
<td>16</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy</Td>
<td>
March 2014
</Td>
<td>
May 2014
</Td>
<td>
December 2014
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>julius</Td>
<td>
June 2011
</Td>
<td>
September 2011
</Td>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

| Project/Increment Title | in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability                                                                                                                    |
|-----------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Chinook New Buy         | Entry into Service is One Aircraft Delivered to the UK with an Interim Release to Service.                                                                      |
| Julius                  | 2 Aircraft Available for Deployment at the Required Capability with all Defence Lines of Development in Place Including Simulator, Out of 4 Aircraft Delivered. |

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy</Td>
<td>may 2014</Td>
<td>
November 2014
</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>6</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>julius</Td>
<td>
September 2011
</Td>
<td>april 2013</Td>
<td>19</Td>
<td>19</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Chinook New Buy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>a Senior Boeing/MoD Independent Programme Review Identified Additional Risks Surrounding the Integration of Digital Auto Flight Control System and that the Flight Test Schedule, Whilst Adequate in Flying Hours, Provides Limited Scope in Programme Timescale to Address any Issues Identified During Flight Test.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.2 Julius

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
June 2011
</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>test &amp; Evaluation Issues (Software, Firmware and Electro Magnetic Compatibility)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
October 2011
</Td>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reappraisal of Technical Risks and Delivery Timescales</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
November 2011
</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reappraisal of Technical Risks and Delivery Timescales</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
11
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>unable to Provide the User Sufficient Confidence of a Solution to How the Aircraft's Height Relative to the Surrounding Terrain is Displayed in the Cockpit.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy</Td>
<td>worldwide Deployment of New Aircraft will be Delayed.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>julius</Td>
<td>crew Conversion Delayed for Pre-Deployment Training for Afghanistan.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook New Buy</Td>
<td>the Delivery of 14 Aircraft Available for Worldwide Deployment to any Theatre of Operation</Td>
<td>on-Track</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>julius</Td>
<td>33 of the Entire UK Chinook Fleet Fitted with Julius</Td>
<td>on-Track</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.1. Scope of Support / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>scope</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook</Td>
<td>spares-Inclusive Availability Based Contract with Boeing.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>chinook</Td>
<td>may 2011</Td>
<td>may 2011</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation

## C.5.3. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract End Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>through Life Chinook Support</Td>
<td>march 2016</Td>
<td>march 2016</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>new Buy Support</Td>
<td>march 2016</Td>
<td>march 2016</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project/
Increment Title
</Th>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Chinook New Buy
</Td>
<td>79</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>
Joined Population in January 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Julius
</Td>
<td>65</Td>
<td>86</Td>
<td>
Initial Operating Capability Date Slippag
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>the Provision of the Chinook Mk4 &amp; Mk6 Platform Including all Appropriate Mission Equipment Needed to Meet the Key User Requirements Specified and Endorsed by the MOD Unified Customer.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>the Chinook Training Solution will Deliver Appropriately Qualified Personnel, to Allow Front Line Commands to Generate the Force Elements at Readiness Required for Contingent Tasks in Accordance with the Force Commanders Plans.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>the Logistics DLOD Covers the Provision of the Logistics Support Solution Required to Sustain the Chinook Mk4 and Mk6 Fleet Capability until the OSD to a Level Specified in the Joint Business Agreement (JBA) with both Joint Helicopter Command. (JULIUS Risk Only)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>the Infrastructure DLoD Embraces the Investment Required in the UK MoD Estate to Deliver the Infrastructure Necessary to Support Chinook Capability, Associated Equipments and Personnel.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>the Timely Provision of Sufficient, Capable, Trained, Equipped and Motivated Personnel to Deliver Defence Outputs, both Now and in the Future for Chinook Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>the Concepts and Doctrine DLoD for Chinook Mk4 and Mk6 Aircraft to Full Operational Capability is Bounded By: The Need to Provide a Timely, Coherent and Dynamic Concept of Use (CONUSE) for all Chinook Marks; and Devise and Deliver Relevant and Updated Tactical Doctrine, Including Tactics, Techniques and Procedures, for Chinook Training and Operational Flying.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>establish an Operational and Nonoperational Organisational Relationships of People for the Chinook Force. It Typically Includes Military Force Structures, MoD Civilian Organisational Structures and Defence Contractors Providing Support.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>the Information DLOD is Concerned with the Contribution that Data, Information and Knowledge Make to Chinook Operational Capability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td> ()</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>lift. the User Requires the Ability to Conduct Vertical Lift Operations to Deploy and Support Joint Forces, as Operationally Effective Units, from Land Bases.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2. Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of Development
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>new Buy - DAS Obsolescence Issues; JULIUS - Technical Issues may Lead to a Gradual Delivery of Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>new Buy - Staff Resource Holding Up Procurement of Simulator.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1. Chinook New Buy

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>2</Th>
<th>equipment</Th>
<th>operational Availability. the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level of Operational Effect Throughout Its Expected Life.</Th>
<th>yes (with Risks)</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>survivability. the User Shall be Able to Deliver the Required Operational Capability Within a Man-Made Hostile Environment.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>interoperability. the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interoperate with Relevant Military and Civil Authorities.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>environmental. the User Requires the Capability to Conduct Operations in the Defined Natural and Man Made Environmental Conditions.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>operational Locations. the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate from Land and Sea Bases.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>deployability. the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Deployed to Those Areas of the World in which UK Forces can be Expected to Operate.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2. Availability</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>funding at Risk for Aircraft Life Sustainment Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>3. Survivability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>obsolescence Issues Affecting Defence Aids Fit for Aircraft</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2. Availability</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>lack of Aircraft Numbers on Front Line</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>3. Survivability</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>aircraft may be at Risk in Certain</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3.2. Julius

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>lift. the User Requires a Capability to Insert, Resupply, Relocate and Extract Conventional &amp; Special Forces, as Operationally Effective Units, to and from Target Areas</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>operational Availability. the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available to Sustain the Required Level of Operational Effect</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>3</Th>
<th>equipment</Th>
<th>survivability. the User Shall be Able to Deliver Operational Capability with a Likelihood of Survival Within Permissive, Semipermissive and Non-Permissive Environments, Commensurate with the Operational Context.</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>interoperability. the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate with Relevant Military and Civil Authorities and Organisations</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>day/Night All Environment. the User Shall Have a Capability that can Operate Within Defined Natural and Man-Made Environmental Conditions in Order to Conduct Specified Tasks.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>operational Locations. the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Operated from both Land and Sea Bases.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>deployability. the User Requires a Capability that can be Strategically and Tactically Deployed World Wide.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>5. Environment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical Issues may Delay Full Low Light Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>6. Op Locations</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>awaiting Read-Across of Ship Clearances from Other Marks.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>5. Environment</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>deployment to Certain Theatres may be Delayed.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>6. Op Locations</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>nil - Temporary Clearances Sought, with more Operational Risk Held.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.4. Support Contract

## D.4.1. Chinook

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>aircraft Available to the Authority for Operational and Training Purposes on a Daily Basis. an Aircraft is not Considered to be Available to the Authority when it Has less than 3 Flying Hours Available.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>technical Support and Items, Within the Scope of this Partnering Agreement, Provided to Ensure that the Authority, with Reasonable Endeavours, is Capable of Maintaining 70% of the Authority Held Aircraft Serviceable.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>2 (1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>1. Availability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>through Life Chinook Support is Delivering, but Availability of Aircraft is Impacted by JULIUS Embodiment Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>1. Availability</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>lack of Aircraft Numbers on Front Line</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
