---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Concept Phase Projects
Project: Attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme
Page_from: 242.0
Page_to: 243.0
Project_label: Apache Attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme
Project_type_label: Concept Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_242_243.md
---
ATTACK HELICOPTER CAPABILITY SUSTAINMENT PROGRAMME

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project Title</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>team Responsible</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>apache Project Team</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>senior Responsible Owner Date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cdre Jonathan Pentreath (Capability Director Joint Helicopter Command) 2<sup>nd</Sup> January 2013</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name Current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>apache Capability Sustainment Programme Concept Phase</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

232

ATTACK HELICOPTER CAPABILITY SUSTAINMENT PROGRAMME

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

UK Defence Competed to Provide an Attack Helicopter Capability to Replace the Lynx/Tube-Launched Optically Tracked Wire-Guided Missile (TOW) Combination During the 1990s. the Competition Resulted in the Selection of the AgustaWestland (then GKN Westland) Apache WAH-64, Known to the British Army as the Apache AH Mk1, and which Entered Service in 2004.

The UK’s Apache AH Mk1 is a Modified US AH-64d Block 1 and is Becoming Increasingly Obsolescent. the Attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme (AHCSP) Addresses Existing and Forecast Critical Obsolescence Issues that will Progressively Degrade Operational Capability of the Current Apache AH Mk1 Towards the End of the Decade, Following the Withdrawal from Service of the Equivalent US Apache Model, and Which, if Left Untreated, Would Result in the Complete Loss of the Attack Helicopter Capability in the Period 2020 to 2025. the Aim of the Capability Sustainment Programme is to Deliver the Sustainment of the Required Attack Helicopter Capability in Support of Extant Defence Policy Across the Full Spectrum of Warfare until 2040.

## A.2. the Concept Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the AHCSP Concept Phase Strategy is to Define and Analyse the Platform, Support and Training Options to Address the Attack Helicopter Requirement and to Recommend Options to be Assessed in Greater Detail in the Assessment Phase to Deliver the Optimal Value for Money Solution for the Ongoing Provision of the Capability. the Concept Phase will Result In:
<ul>
<li>candidate Key User Requirements and the User Requirements Document.</Li>
<li>the Recommendation of Platform Options to be Analysed in the Assessment Phase. the Platform Options Analysed During the Concept Phase Fall into Three Categories:
<ul>
<li>obsolescence Management of the Apache AH Mk 1</Li>
<li>upgrade to Apache AH64E</Li>
<li>new Attack Helicopter Platform</Li>
</Ul></Li>
<li>the Most Appropriate Procurement Strategy to Deliver the Capability Sustainment Programme</Li>
<li>the Recommendation of Support Options and also the Training Delivery and Synthetic Training Equipment Options to be Analysed in the Assessment Phase, Based on the Platform Option(s) Recommended at Initial Gate.</Li>
<li>the Work Package and the Funding Requirements to Conduct the Resulting Assessment Phase Plan.</Li>
</Ul></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.3. in-Year Progress

The Concept Phase Has Seen the Production, Delivery and Endorsement of the Key User Requirements. the AHCSP Options Analysis, Based on Engineering Analyses and Cost Modelling Have Largely Been Completed with the Final Validation and Verification of the Investment Appraisal of the Options Considered as the Main Outstanding Issue. the Options and Associated Procurement Strategy will be Taken to the MOD’s Investment Approval Committee in Q4 2013 for Initial Gate Approval to Launch the Assessment Phase. the Time-Phased Budget of Work for the Platform, Training and Integrated Logistic Support Requirements is Being Developed to Support the Initial Gate Business Case.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme Addresses Existing and Forecast Critical Obsolescence Issues that will Progressively Degrade Operational Capability of the Current Apache AH Mk1 Towards the End of the Decade, Following the Withdrawal from Service of the Equivalent US Apache Model, and Which, if Left Untreated, Would Result in the Complete Loss of the Attack Helicopter Capability in the Period 2020 to 2025.

## A.5. Associated Projects – N/a

## A.6. Procurement Strategy – N/a

## A.7. Support Strategy – N/a

233
