---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Type 45 Destroyer
Page_from: 283.0
Page_to: 308.0
Project_label: Type 45 Destroyer
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_283_308.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Type 45
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Destroyers
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Simon Kings(Above Water Capability)
</Td>
<td>14th February 2011</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects /
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 45 Destroyer
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Type 45 is a New Class of Six Anti-Air Warfare Destroyers, to Replace the Capability Provided by the

Royal Navy’s Existing Type 42s. the Warship is Being Procured Nationally. the Type 45 will Carry the Principal Anti-Air Missile System (Including the Aster Missile, Now Known as Sea Viper) which is Capable of Protecting the Vessels and Ships in their Company Against Aircraft and Missiles, Satisfying the Fleet’s Need for Area Air Defence Capability into the 2030s. the Principal Anti-Air Missile System is Being Procured Collaboratively with France and Italy. the Destroyers Team is Responsible for Providing the Principal Anti-Air Missile System to the Warship Prime Contractor.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Type 45 Destroyer Programme Builds on the Assessment Work Carried Out in Phase 1 of the Collaborative Horizon Project, the Warship Element of the Common New Generation Frigate Programme. Following the Decision of the Three Horizon Partners (France, Italy and the United Kingdom) to Proceed with the Principal Anti-Air Missile System, but to Pursue National Warship Programmes, BAE Systems Was Appointed Prime Contractor for the Type 45 in November 1999. the Contract for the Principal AntiAir Missile System Full Scale Engineering Development and Initial Production Was Placed in August 1999. Main Gate Approval for the Warship Was Achieved in July 2000 and a Contract for Demonstration and First of Class Manufacture Was Placed in December 2000. the Type 45 Destroyer Programme Builds on the Assessment Work Carried Out in Phase 1 of the Collaborative Horizon Project, the Warship Element of the Common New Generation Frigate Programme. Following the Decision of the Three Horizon Partners (France, Italy and the United Kingdom) to Proceed with the Principal Anti-Air Missile System, but to Pursue National Warship Programmes, BAE Systems Was Appointed Prime Contractor for the Type 45 in November 1999. the Contract for the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Full Scale Engineering Development and Initial Production Was Placed in August 1999. Main Gate Approval for the Warship Was Achieved in July 2000 and a Contract for Demonstration and First of Class Manufacture Was Placed in December 2000.

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

BAE Systems Electronics Was Appointed Prime Contractor for the Type 45 in November 1999 and a Contract for Demonstration and First of Class Manufacture for the First Three Ships Was Placed in December 2000. a Contract for a Further Three Type 45 Hulls Was Placed with the Prime Contractor in February 2002. the Ships are Being Built under Sub-Contract by BAE Systems Maritime – Naval Ships.

The Demonstration & Manufacture Contract Was Amended to Reflect the Investment Approvals Board SixShip Approval Gained in August 2007. This Change Introduced a Staged Acceptance Process for Each Ship, Commencing with Acceptance Off Contract, Thereby Giving Control of the Vessel to the MOD to Undertake a Further Period of Trials and Acceptance Activity Leading to the Declaration of in-Service Date. It Was Announced in June 2008 that as Part of the Department’s 2008 Planning Round the Decision Was Taken not to Take Up the Option to Proceed with Type 45 Ships 7 and 8.

During the Department’s 2010 Planning Round a Decision Was Taken to Amend the Production Programme of Aster Missiles. This Decision Deferred Production of some Missiles, Reducing Costs in Early Years, but Adding £46m to the Overall Cost of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme. However, the Effect of Other Planning Round 10 Decisions and the Benefits Accrued Through the Good Progress of the Ship Programme, Meant that the Result Was No Overall Cost Growth of the T45 Programme.

The First Ship, HMS Daring Was Accepted into Service with the Royal Navy on 31 July 2010, with the Second Ship, HMS Dauntless, Being Similarly Accepted on 16 November 2010. During 2010, Good Progress Continued to be Achieved Across the Build Programme with the Third Ship, HMS Diamond Being Accepted Off Contract on 22 September 2010 and the Fourth Ship, HMS Dragon Completing Her First Contractor Sea Trials in December 2010. the Final Type 45, HMS Duncan, Was Launched in October 2010. the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Development Test Firing Programme Was Successfully Completed in June 2010 with a Salvo Firing from the Longbow Barge at a French Test Range in the Mediterranean. the High Seas Firing Programme from Type 45 Platforms Commenced with a Successful Firing from HMS Dauntless in September 2010 at the UK Hebrides Test Range.

The Contract for Up to Seven Years of Support for Type 45, Awarded to BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd in September 2009, Has Delivered the Required Availability to Enable Those Ships Declared in-Service to Achieve their Programmed Activities.

During the Department’s 2011 Planning Round Savings Measures Were Implemented as a Result of the Combination of Forecast Terms of Business Agreement Savings, Risk Retirement Following Successful

^enter\ Text\ Here^completion of the Sea Viper Development Firing Programme and Early ISD of the First Two Ships and Early Acceptance Off-Contract of the Third Ship Against their 50% Confidence Dates. as a Result of These Savings, which Amounted to some £34m, the Decision Was Taken to Reverse a Cost Capability Trade Made in 2006 that Proposed to Reduce the Spend on Aster Missiles by some £30m. the Overall Effect of These Decisions and the Change in Departmental Policy with Respect to Cost of Capital Was a Forecast Decrease of £30m in the Overall Cost of the Programme.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Throughout the Course of the Last 12 Months, Up to End March 2012, the Type 45 Programme Continued to Deliver Against Its Target Plans Across the Class of Six Ships. the Most Notable Achievements Were a Successful High Seas Firing of the Sea Viper Missile System from HMS Daring in April 2011 (the First from that Ship), the Declaration of in Service Date of the Third Type 45 HMS Diamond in July 2011 and the Acceptance Off Contract of the Fourth Type 45 HMS Dragon in August 2011. in Addition, Sea Trials of Those Ships yet to Reach in Service Date Have also Been Successful with the Fifth Type 45 Defender Undertaking both of Her Contractor Led Trials and HMS Dragon Completing Sufficient of Her MOD Led Trials to Successfully Demonstrate the Level of Military Utility to Enable the Transfer of Asset to the Front Line User, Navy Command, in February 2012.

The Successful Delivery of the above Programme Milestones Has Allowed the MOD to Retire Risk Funding and for both Industry and MOD to Re-Cost Remaining Activities with Greater Certainty in the Final Outturn of the Programme. These are the Significant Contributors to the in Year Programme Cost Reduction of £108m.

## A.5. Capability Risks

In Order for a Force of Ships to Operate Safely at Sea and Project Power Onto the Land, it Has to Reduce Its Susceptibility to Attack from the Air. the Current Generation of Anti-Air Warfare Capability (Type 42 Destroyer) Has Already Been Extended Beyond Its Design Life and is Now Rapidly Approaching Its Out of Service Date. the Type 45 Destroyer will Ensure that UK Maritime Forces Retain a Sufficiently Robust Capability to Counter the Growing Threat from the Air for the Next 25 Years. Without the Type 45, the UK Would be Severely Limited in Its Ability to Operate Maritime Forces in all but the Most Benign Environments. There Would also be a Significant Shortfall in the Number of Ships Available to Deploy World-Wide in Support of Wider British Interests, Fulfilling Roles from Defence Diplomacy to Disaster Relief to Crisis Intervention.

## A.6. Associated Projects

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>bae Systems

Surface Ships Ltd

(BAE Systems Electronics Ltd Farnborough)</Td>
<td>full Development and Production</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee Shareline</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>principal Anti-Air Missile System</Td>
<td>
EURO PAAMS
</Td>
<td>full Scale Engineering Development and Initial Production Including Missiles for Initial Use</Td>
<td>fixed Price</Td>
<td>
Collaborative with

France and Italy</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>principal Anti-Air Missile System</Td>
<td>
EURO PAAMS
</Td>
<td>follow-on Ships Production</Td>
<td>fixed Price for Five Follow-on Equipments</Td>
<td>
Collaborative with

France and Italy</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>principal Anti-Air Missile System</Td>
<td>eurosam
&amp; UKAMS<sup>1</Sup></Td>
<td>production of Missiles</Td>
<td>fixed Price</Td>
<td>
Collaborative with

France and Italy Through Organisation Conjointe De Cooperation en Matiere D'
Armement</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
There are Three Broad Layers to Type 45 Destroyer Support:

<ol Type="a">
<li>interim Support (Support to Stage 2 Trials) Covers the Period from the First of Class (HMS Daring) Acceptance Off Contract to in-Service Date. the Change to Ship Acceptance Approved as Part of Wider Programme Re-Approval in August 2007 Advances the Date that the First of Class is Accepted Off Contract, Consequently Requiring Interim Support Arrangements to be Put in Place until in-Service Date. Funding For</Li>
</Ol>

Interim Support Was Approved under the Six Ship Approval and Costs are Reported Against the Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase Costs for Type 45, Hence this Element is not Reported Further Within the Support Section. the Interim Support Contract Completed at in-Service Date for HMS Daring. for the Other Five Type 45s Support to Stage 2 Trials will be Provided under the Full Support Contract, Although, as Above, Funding Was Approved under the Six Ship Approval and Costs are Reported Against the Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase Costs for Type 45.

<ol Start="2" Type="a">
<li>type 45 Initial Spares (Industrial Investment and Long Lead Spares). Purchase of Long-Lead Spares and Industrial Mobilisation Activities for which Contracts Needed to be Placed Ahead of the Type 45 Full Support Solution (See C. Below) in Order to be Available for in-Service Date. the Approval Did not Set any Time Limits for Contract End Dates, Therefore Only Progress Against Cost Boundaries is Reported Within the Support Section.</Li>
<li>full Support. Phase 1 of the Long Term Support Strategy is the Delivery of a Class Wide Type 45 Support Solution Through a Single Source Incentivised Contract with BAE Systems Surface Fleet Ltd as the Support Integrator for Type 45. Support will then Migrate into the Surface Ship Support Programme (SSSP). the Full Support Contract for the Warship (the Phase 1 Work Described above) Was Placed in September 2009. It Includes the Activities to Establish the Support Solution Infrastructure and Team and then to Provide Up to Seven Years in-Service Support. Support to the Principal Anti-Air Missile System (PAAMS) is Provided by a Separate Single Source Incentivised Contract with MBDA (UK), which Was Placed on 26th April 2011.</Li>
</Ol></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Initial Spares</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd
</Td>
<td>
Lead Time Spares and Industrial Mobilsation
</Td>
<td>
Mix of Fixed and Firm Price
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Full Support</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd
</Td>
<td>
Of Support for Type 45 Platform Equipments and
</Td>
<td>
Target Cost Incentive Fee
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1

UKAMS is a Wholly Owned Company of MBDA.

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>213</Td>
<td>232</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
<td>4%</Td>
<td>4%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>213</Td>
<td>232</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
<td>4%</Td>
<td>4%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
4757
</Td>
<td>
5209
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>4757</Td>
<td>5556</Td>
<td>+799</Td>
<td>-108</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>4757</Td>
<td>5556</Td>
<td>+799</Td>
<td>-108</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Type 45 Destroyer

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-30
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>bae Systems Terms of Business Agreement Savings Released from the Six Ship Contract (-£30m) Due to Greater Certainty in the Cost to Complete the Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-37
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>risk Retirement (-£37m). This Comprises Release of Risk During the Planning Round 12 Review Process (-£5m), Release of Risk Funding Associated with HMS Dragon (-£26m) and Successful Mitigation of Risk Outside of the Six Ship Approval Boundary (£6m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>march 2012</Th>
<th>-29</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>revised Programme Cost to Completion (-£5m) Driven By; Reduced Costs for Batch 2 Stage 2 Trials (-£7m); and a Revised Estimate to Completion of the Interim Support Costs (-£17m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-12</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>reversal of Previous Sea-Viper Planning Round Decsions (-£15m) and in-Year Sea-Viper Programme Adjustments (+£3m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-21</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>planning Round Decisions and Adjustments in 2011. Risk Reduction and Re-Profiling (-
£11m), BAE Systems Terms of Business Agreement Savings Released Through the Six Ship Contract (-£10m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-21</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>in Year Underspend as a Result of Risk Retirement (-£24m) from Programme Successes E.g. in Service Date and Aster Missiles Firings. in Year Overspend on Sea Viper (+£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-18</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of IRDEL (Foreign Exchange) in Accordance with a Change of Departmental Policy</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+30</Td>
<td>capability Trading</Td>
<td>decision to Reverse Capability Trade with Respect to Funding of Aster Missile Production Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-277</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-17</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>benefit of on Time Contractual Delivery of Ships 1 &amp; 2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>in-Year Underspend (-£9m), Resulting in Slippage of Work (+£6m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>planning Round Decisions and Adjustments in 2009 (+£2m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-40</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>planning Round Decisions and Adjustments in 2010 (-£40m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+20</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>principal Anti-Air Missile System FOREX Increase, in-Year (+£14m) and in Planning Round 2010 (+£7m), but Reduced FOREX Related iRDEL (-£1m)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+46</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme Re-Alignment of Aster Missile Production Schedule in Planning Round 2010</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-26</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>benefits of Earlier Delivery of Platforms Through Reduced Trials Support Costs (-£30m) Offset by an Increase in Programme Costs Identified Through the Annual Financial Planning Process (+£4m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+44</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>increase in the Principal Anti-Air Missile System in-Year Costs Due to Exchange Rate (+£23m) and an Increase in the Principal AntiAir Missile System Planning Round 2009 Costs for Exchange Rate (+£21m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>additional Type 45 Ship Costs Due to Higher than Anticipated Escalation of Contractual Variation on Price Indices (+£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-113</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>as a Direct Result of a Move of Ship Build from Barrow to Clyde, in Line with Maritime Industrial Strategy Principles, There Has Been an Increase in Overheads for the ‘six Ship Proposal’ Price that is not Directly Attributable to this Project (-£78m). Transfer to Maritime Training Systems Integrated Project Team (£35m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>
-114
</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>equipment Programme 2007 Savings Measure to Reduce the Quantity of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Missiles (-
£30m).a Combination of Equipment Plan Options Plus Internal Adjustments. the Options Were: Re-Profiling of the Contract for Demonstration and Manufacture (Approved Six-Ship Programme);
Re-Profiling of the (Planned) Twelve Ship Programme; Reducing the Scope of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Missile Buy and Costs of Shipbuilders’ Premium (+£91m). Increases to the Principal AntiAir Missile System Contract and Additional Funding and Increases in Delay and Dislocation Money (+£177m). Incremental Acquisition Programme Reprofiling and Incremental Acquisition Programme Upgrade Deleted (-£238m). Equipment Plan Options Re-Profiling Costs for Ships Five and Six and Deferring Ships Seven and Eight (+£2m). Correction to Forecast: Costs Wrongly Attributed to Ships the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Increased Cost of Longbow Mooring (+£4m). Savings in Ships Capability (Performance) to Bring Costs Back to Equipment Programme 2005 Baseline; Combat Systems Risk Provision (-£60m), Whole Life Support (Support Solution Study) (-£21m) and Incremental Acquisition Programme (-£64m). Revised Estimate of Westinghouse Rolls-Royce 21 Engine Concept/Assessment Phase (-£1m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1355</Td>
<td>contracting Process</Td>
<td>estimated Increase in Ship Build Cost Based on an Assessment of the 'Six Ship Proposal' Price from the Prime Contractor (+£462m). Estimated Increase in Ship Build Cost (+£184m). Costs Omitted from Equipment Programme 2005 and MPR05 Relating to Increase in Ship Build Cost (+£52m). Higher than Expected Costs for the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Production Equipment (+£124m). Corrections to Warship Costs (+£13m). Expected Increase in Costs of Elements of Batch Two Ships which are yet to be Negotiated (+£250m). Corrections and Adjustments to Forecast Costs (+£97m). the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Missiles Re-Instated (+£173m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+55</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>pound to Euro Rate Worse than Originally Forecast (+£47m). the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Exchange Rate (Impact of Rate at Equipment Programme 2005) (+£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>issues Arising from Migrating from Skynet 4 to Skynet 5 and to Implement System Growth (+£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+799</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
FALSE
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 66%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>there Was No Operational Impact on the Programme as in 2007 and 2008 Additional Funding Was Acquired Through the Planning Round.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Initial Spares</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Full Support</Td>
<td>804</Td>
<td>747</Td>
<td>-57</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
818
</Td>
<td>
761
</Td>
<td>
-57
</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Type 45 Destroyer Full Support

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+11</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>inclusion of Type-45 Specific Combat Systems Costs Managed by Another Project Team Within the Scope of the in-Service Approval (+£11m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-21</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>programme Adjustments both Inyear FY2011/12 Reductions (£25m) and as Part of Plannning Round 12 Realignment (+£4m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+15</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>as Costs Have Matured and Additional Contracts Have Been Placed, the Sea-Viper Contracts Value Have Increased (+£15m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-16</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>a Planning Round 2011 Option Re Profiled the Type 45 Build and Support Programme to Take Account of the Adjustments in the Programme and the Latest Pricing Information.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>the Impact of Agreeing and Placing Remaining Support Contracts for Sea Viper at an Overall Lower Cost than Originally Estimated.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-31</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>variation Caused by Better Estimations Made after Awarding and Embedding of Support Contract that Have Come in Below Approval Figures Used to Estimate in the Prior Year</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>the Impact of Agreeing and Placing Support Contracts at a Lower Cost than Originally Estimated.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-57</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

\-

## B.4.2. Operational Impact on Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 66%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project /
Increment Title</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Full Support</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
No Operational Impact is Expected as the Reduced Spares Holdings will Still Allow the Ships to Meet their Required Operational Availability.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>232</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>232</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>5000</Td>
<td>218</Td>
<td>5218</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>139</Td>
<td>93</Td>
<td>232</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>5371</Td>
<td>311</Td>
<td>5682</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>july 1991</Td>
<td>july 2000</Td>
<td>108<sup>2</Sup></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
May 2007
</Td>
<td>
November 2007
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>the Date to which the First of Class will Meet the Customer's Minimum Operational Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>may 2007</Td>
<td>july 2010</Td>
<td>+38</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Type 45 Destroyer

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-4
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>retirement of Programme Risk (E.g. 2 Successful Principal Anti-Air Missile System Missile Firings, Daring Accepted Off Contract) Now Reflected in Latest Timescale Risk Analysis which Indicated in-Service Date Achievable 4 Months Earlier than Previously Anticipated.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+24
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>longer than Expected Design Phase Plus an Acknowledgement that a Number of Other Factors which Had Impacted Earlier in the Programme Had Injected Unrecoverable Delay. These Factors Were Principally Related to Delays in Agreeing the Original Industrial Strategy; Problems Associated with Managing Parallel and Dependant Development Programmes and a Better Understanding of the Programme to Deliver in-Service Date. (MPR02 +6 Months; MPR04 +18 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+18</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>latest Timescale Risk Analysis Founded on Data from Six Ship Proposal from BAE Systems (+11 Months). Refinement of Timescale Risk Analysis Shows that There are a Number of Opportunities in the Programme which Support a Most Likely Date of December 2009. Principal among These is the Opportunity for Parallel Working that is not yet Fully Exploited Within Industry’s Plan and the Potential to Use the Second Ship to Demonstrate Elements of First of Class Capability (-1 Month). Impact of Slippage to SAMPSON Programme and Measures Taken to Mitigate the Full Impact of that Delay (+3 Months). Assessment Based on Full Timescale Risk Analysis (Conducted Jointly with BAE Systems) which Gave a Most Likely Date of March 2010, Based on Baseline Programme. Agreement Reached with Company and Customer 1, However, on How Stage 2 Trials Programme can be De-Scoped Thereby Giving a Most Likely Date of October 2009 (+ 2 Months). Latest Assessment Based on Timescale Risk Analysis of Most Up to Date Programme Reflecting De-Scoping of Trials Programme (+3 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+38</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Improved Estimate as a Result of Recent Studies.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>additional Maintenance Periods Required to Run-on Type 42 Destroyer for 11 Months<sup>3</Sup>.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>additional Maintenance

Periods Required to

Run-on Type 42 Destroyer for 7 Months.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+196</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Additional Type 42 Run-on Costs Due to Type 45 Slippage.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>+195</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>delay in in-Service Date Extended the Period Before a Capability to Defeat Multiple Attacks by Sea-Skimming Missiles Was Available, as Well as the Capability for Royal Navy Escorts to Provide Tactical Control of Combat Aircraft.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability will Occur when all Systems are at Full System Acceptance, the Principal Anti-Air

Missile System Full Capability Has Been Delivered and all Environmental Trials are Complete. for Ship 1 Full

Operating Capability will Occur after InService Date.</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.1. Scope of Support / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>scope</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Initial Spares</Td>
<td>contract for Purchase of Long Lead Time Spares and Industrial Mobilisation Activities</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Full Support</Td>
<td>up to Seven Years’ of Support for Type 45 Platform Equipments and some Complex Equipments</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Initial Spares</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Full Support</Td>
<td>april 2009</Td>
<td>
September 2009
</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation

Type 45 Destroyer

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>
5 Month Delay in Placing Full Support

Contract Caused by Extended Contract Negotiations and Legal Review of Proposed Contract</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.3. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract End Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Initial Spares</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer Full Support</Td>
<td>
November 2017
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation

## C.5.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Support Cost Variation

## C.5.5. Operational Impact of Support / PFI Support Contract Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyer</Td>
<td>the Delay in Placing the Support Contract Resulted in Reducing the Contract Mobilisation Period. There Was No Operational Impact to HMS Daring as the Ship Did not Enter Service until July 2010.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

2

This Aligns with the Derived Date for Initial Gate Above. Type 45 is a Legacy Project Building on the Assessment Work Carried Out in Phase 1 of the Collaborative Horizon Project.

3

Relates to Slippage to in-Service Date of Type 45 First of Class Only, to Align with the Definition of in-Service Date at Section C.3.2

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>last Years Score</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
88% GREEN
</Td>
<td>
82% GREEN
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>at in Service Date it Was Accepted that some Technical Issues Remained Within the Ship's Power and Propulsion System and Communications Systems.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>type 45 Platform Including the Principal Anti-Air Missile System</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>provision of First of Class and Steady State Training For: Weapons Engineer;
Marine Engineer; Warfare and the Principal Anti-Air Missile System. Also Provision of Collective Training</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>investment Approval Board Submission; Unit Maintenance Management System; Tech. Docs.;
Initial Provision Lists and First Outfit;
Tooling; Support Data Pack; Support Solution Envelope; Principal Anti-Air Missile System &amp; Long Range Radar;
Information Management System</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>appropriate Facilities for Type 45 to be Available at the Following: Her Majesty's Naval Base Portsmouth; Her Majesty's Naval Base Devonport; Her Majesty's Naval Base Clyde; Defence Storage and Distribution Agency Gosport</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>provision of Manpower (the Crew) for all 6 Ships</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>enable Type 45 to Undertake Assigned Operations.; Enable Type 45 Air Defence Activity; Tactical Advice for Use of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System Command and Control, Aster Missile System and Combat Management System; Capability Upgrades are Enabled Through Platform Life</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>maintenance of Type 45 in-Service Date and Type 42 Paying Off Plan.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>included Within the Equipment Defence Lines of Development for Type 45</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2. Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>equipment</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>at in Service Date the Previous Issues with Respect to Aster Missile Reliability Had Been Successfully Addressed Through a Salvo Firing in June 2010.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Key Remaining Risk is Against Aster Missile Reliability. Investigation Continues Through the Tri-National Principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme, Mitigation Includes Further Test Firings and a UK Salvo Firing in June 2010.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Key Remaining Risk is the Delivery of Steady State Training for Marine Engineering, Sea Viper and Warfare Maritime Composite Training System. Steady State Training Should be Available During 2011, but this is Currently Being Mitigated Through Interim Training Measures.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Key Remaining Risk is that the Sea Viper in-Service Support Contract will not be in Place for HMS Daring InService Date. This Affects the Availability of HMS Daring’s Sea Viper System, which is Being Mitigated by Interim Contractual Arrangements. a Further Consequence of the Aster Missile Reliability Issue is the Availability of the Aster Missile Stockpile. This Risk is to be Tolerated until a Revised Delivery Profile is Received from the Sea Viper Programme, at which Time Further Mitigation may be Possible.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Key Remaining Risk is the Ability to Maintain the Aster Missile Stockpile. This Requires Provision of a Dedicated UK Missile Maintenance Installation which is Due to be Installed Within Defence Storage and Distribution Agency Gosport and Available in 2014. This Risk, which is Based on Missile Shelf Life, is to be Tolerated with Careful Stockpile Management as Reworked Missiles are Delivered.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Key Remaining Risk is the Testing and Integration of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System. This will be Mitigated Through Further Test Firings and Naval Weapons Sea Trials During 2009.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Key Remaining Risk is the Timely Delivery of Marine Engineering Shoredbased Training for Dauntless. This is Being Mitigated Through the Delivery of Customised Courses Making Use of Training Material Already Produced for Daring’s Crew, Augmented by the Increased Use of Onboard Training.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Historic
</Th>
<th>
Infrastructure
</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>the Key Remaining Risk is the Timely Provision of an Aster Capable Missile Loading Facility in Portsmouth. the Late Provision of this Facility Would be Mitigated by the Use of Alternative Missile Loading Facilities at Either Marchwood Military Port Near Southampton or Glen Mallen Near Glasgow.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1. Type 45 Destroyer

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>principal Anti-Air Missile System. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Protect with a Probability of Escaping Hit of {w}, all Units Operating Within a Radius of {x}, Against Up to {y} Supersonic Sea Skimming Missiles Arriving Randomly Within {z} Seconds.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>force Anti-Air Warfare Situational Awareness. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Assess the Air Warfare Tactical Situation of 1000 Air Real World Objects Against a Total Arrival and/or Departure Rate of 500 Air Real World Objects per Hour.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>aircraft Control. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Provide Close Tactical Control to at Least 4 Fixed Wing Aircraft, or 4 Groups of Aircraft in Single Speaking Units, Assigned to the Force.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>aircraft Operation. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Operate both One Organic Merlin (AntiSubmarine Warfare and Utility Variants) and One Organic Lynx Mk8 Helicopter, Although not Simultaneously.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>embarked Military Force. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Operate an Embarked Military Force of at Least 30 Deployable Troops.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>naval Diplomacy. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Coerce Potential Adversaries into Compliance with the Wishes of Her Majesty's Government or the Wider International Community Through the Presence of a Medium Calibre Gun System of at Least 114mm.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>range. the Type 45 Shall be Able to Transit at Least 3000 Nautical Miles to Its Assigned Mission, Operate for 3 Days and Return to Point of Origin, Unsupported Throughout, Within 20 Days.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>growth Potential. the Type 45 Capability Shall be Able to be Upgraded to Incorporate New Capabilities or to Enhance Extant Capabilities Through Displacement Margins of at Least 11.5%.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>availability. the Type 45 Shall Have a 70%
Availability to Contribute to Maritime Operations over a Period of at Least 25 Years, of which at Least 35%
Shall be Spent at Sea.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>this Key Performance Measure Was Met in Dec 11 with the Roll-Out of Combat Management System 2.4.3.1 and Recorded in the Portfolio of Evidence for HMS DRAGON's InService Date.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>march 2012</Th>
<th>3</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>this Key Performance Measure Was Met in Jun 11 with the Roll-Out of the SATURN Communications System and Recorded in the Portfolio of Evidence for HMS DIAMOND's in-Service Date.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>this Key Performance Measure Was Met with Resolution of the Electromagnetic Compatibility Issue for Lynx and Recorded in the Portfolio of Evidence for HMS DRAGON's InService Date.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Intent of this Key Performance Measure Was Met, but Further Work is Required Before Operational Deployment.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Intent of this Key Performance Measure Was Met, but at in-Service Date it Was Accepted that Issues with the Communications Systems Affected Situational Awareness. the Agreed Mitigations Included Software Updates, Improved Training and the Development of Standard Operating Procedures.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Intent of this Key Performance Measure Was Met, but at in-Service Date it Was Accepted that Issues with the Communications Systems Affected Aircraft Control. the Agreed Mitigation Was a Major Software Update in August 2010.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Intent of this Key Performance Measure Was Met, but at in-Service Date it Was Accepted that Aircraft Operations Would be Affected by Adverse Electromagnetic Compatibility Issues Between Ship's Systems and Helicopters. the Agreed Mitigation Was Through the Implementation of Standard Operating Procedures.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Intent of this Key Performance Measure Was Met, but at in Service Date the Previous Issues with Respect to Aster Missile Reliability Were Addressed Through a Successful Salvo Firing in June 2010.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>most Recent Principal Anti-Air Missile System Test Firings Did not Meet all of their Planned Objectives. the Key Remaining Risk is Therefore Against Aster Missile Reliability. Investigation Continues Through the Tri-National Principal Anti-Air Missile System Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>2</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>when MPR07 Was Compiled the Extant Version of Combat Management System Software Had Insufficient Capability to Fully Satisfy Key User Requirements 2 and 3. the Decision Was Made During MPR08 Reporting Period to Upgrade the Combat Management System Software, which Increased Functionality and Fully Satisfied Key User Requirements 2 and 3.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>revised Programme to Achieve Earliest Possible in-Service Date Leads to a Lower Level of Combat Management System Functionality at in-Service Date.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>when MPR07 Was Compiled the Extant Version of Combat Management System Software Had Insufficient Capability to Fully Satisfy Key User Requirements 2 and 3. the Decision Was Made During MPR08 Reporting Period to Upgrade the Combat Management System Software, which Increased Functionality and Fully Satisfied Key User Requirements 2 and 3.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>revised Programme to Achieve Earliest Possible in-Service Date Leads to a Lower Level of Combat Management System Functionality at in-Service Date.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>integrated Project Team &amp; Director of Equipment Capability Agreed to Conduct "First of Class Flying Trials" with a Merlin. This will Remove the Expectation that at in-Service Date Only Lynx Capability will Have Been Demonstrated. Ability to Operate Lynx but not Merlin will be Demonstrated by Full Operating Capability in-Service Date. Merlin will be Demonstrated Beyond in-Service</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Date

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td>no Operational Impact. Mitigations are in Place to Ensure that HMS Daring is Able to Meet Her Operational Commitments as Programmed by Navy Command and Promulgated Through the Long Term Operating Schedule.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1, 2, 3 and 4</Td>
<td>to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td>no Operational Impact. Mitigations are in Place to Ensure that HMS Daring is Able to Meet Her Operational Commitments as Programmed by Navy Command and Promulgated Through the Long Term Operating Schedule.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.4. Support Contract

## D.4.1. Type 45 Destroyer

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>attributable Ship Availability Factor. an Overall Assessment of the Ability of the Class of Ships to Undertake their Planned Operational Tasks.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>ship Material State. an Assessment, Conducted Prior to Operational Training, of the Actual Condition of the Equipment on Each Ship.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>safety Performance. a Measure of the Number of Safety Items Whose Mitigation Plans or Completion Dates are Overdue.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>maintenance Clearance Rate. a Measure of the Number of Outstanding Maintenance Items at the End of Formal Maintenance Opportunities.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>support Service Responsiveness. a Measure of the Number of Requests for Support that are Overdue for Closure Beyond their Agreed Target Date.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>sustainability /
Continuous Improvement. a Measure of the Work Undertaken to Improve the Support Service Through a Continuous Improvement Programme Aimed at Reducing Support Costs and/or Increasing Ship Availability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>6 (1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>6 (1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>a Technical IT Problem Meant that 8 Formal Safety Reports from HMS Dragon Became Overdue for their Categorisation Reviews.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>hms Diamond Material and Safety Check 27 Feb 2012 Assessed as Satisfactory for both Marine Engineering &amp; Weapons Engineering.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>hms Dauntless Material Assessment &amp; Safety Check in February 2011 Showed that Whilst Weapons Engineering Aspects Were Satisfactory Marine Engineering Aspects Were Deemed to be Below Standard.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>no Operational Impact as KPM is Forecast to be Met in April 2012 and Tighter Process Controls Have Already Been Implemented to Prevent a Reoccurence of the March 2012 Failure.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>no Operational Impact as KPM Now Forecast to be Met.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td>no Operational Impact. Recovery Action is Part of a Wider Power and Propulsion Package of Work and the Below Standard Assessment is not Considered to be Symptomatic of an Underpinning Long Term Failure. the Recovery Action will Resolve all Issues Prior to HMS Dauntless' First Deployment.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
