---
Year: 2014.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Lightning II
Page_from: 104.0
Page_to: 126.0
Project_label: Joint Combat Aircraft (Lightning II)
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2014_104_126.md
---
<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Lightning II
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Lightning Project Team
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore Mark Hopkins (Air Capability)
</Td>
<td>27 April 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
System Development &amp; Demonstration
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Production, Sustainment &amp; Follow on Development
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Joint Combat Aircraft is the Requirement for a Multi-Role Aircraft to be Operated Jointly by the Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy from both Fixed and Deployable Land Bases and the New Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers.

The Joint Strike Fighter (F-35 Lightning II) Was Selected as the Aircraft to Meet the Joint Combat Aircraft Requirement, and Provides the UK with a Fifth Generation Air System. Lightning II Provides the UK with an Expeditionary Multi-Role Combat Aircraft with the Ability to Enter and Operate Within Contested Airspace. Lightning II is a Stealth Aircraft which Includes an Array of Advanced Sensors, Highly Integrated Mission Systems and is Equipped with Air to Air and Air to Ground Weaponry. It is Capable of Undertaking a Wide Range of Operations from Land Bases and the Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers (QECC).

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Approval Was Obtained in November 1996 to Enter the Concept Demonstration Phase on the Joint Strike Fighter Programme under a Memorandum of Understanding Signed in December 1995. the Phase Began in November 1996 with Two Competing United States Prime Contractors (Boeing and Lockheed Martin) Designing and Flying Demonstration Aircraft on which the Selection of the Preferred Bidder Was Based. the Phase Completed in October 2001 with the Announcement of Lockheed Martin as the Successful Bidder.

## A.3. Project History

The Project Has Followed an Incremental Acquisition Strategy from Its Conception. a Main Gate Approval

(Main Gate 1) Was Obtained in January 2001 for Participation in the System Development and

Demonstration (SDD) Phase of the Joint Strike Fighter Programme, Leading to Signature that Same Month by UK and United States Governments of the SDD Memorandum of Understanding. the UK is the Only Level 1 Partner Nation Within the SDD Programme, along with the United States Services, and is Able to Decide and Agree the Requirements Within the JSF Contract Specification, which Delivers the Block 3 Capability Required by the UK at Initial Operating Capability.

The Selection of Lockheed Martin as the Joint Strike Fighter and Air System Prime Contractor Included a Teaming Agreement with Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems to Collectively Form Team Joint Strike Fighter. Two Separate and Competitive Propulsion Contracts Were Awarded to Pratt and Whitney for the F135 Engine and General Electric/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team for the F136 Engine. in April 2011, the F135 Engine Was Selected as the Sole Engine Variant Within the Joint Strike Fighter Programme.

In September 2002 the UK Selected the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing (STOVL) Joint Strike Fighter Variant to Meet the Joint Combat Aircraft Requirement. a Review of the Joint Strike Fighter Programme, and the Viability of the STOVL Design Was Completed in January 2005 Post a Period of Anticipated Contract Non-Compliance. It Concluded that a Successful Programme of Weight Reduction Initiatives and Other Performance Enhancements Had Restored Confidence in the STOVL Design, which Should Remain the UK’s Preferred Solution to Meet the JCA Requirement. a Further Review by the Investment Approvals Board in July 2006 Confirmed this Decision.

On 12 December 2006 Minister of State for Defence Equipment and Support Signed the Production

Sustainment and Follow-on Development Memorandum of Understanding, which Coincided with Main Gate 2 Approval. This MoU Committed the UK to a Collaborative Partnership with 8 Other International Partners.

In March 2009, Approval (Main Gate 3) Was Given for the Participation in Joint Initial Operational Test & Evaluation with the United States Services. This Main Gate Procured 3 Operational Test Aircraft.

In October 2010 the UK Government's Strategic Defence & Security Review Announced that the Joint Combat Aircraft Programme Would Switch Variant from the STOVL Variant (F-35b) to the Carrier Variant (F-35c).

In May 2012 the UK Government Reverted Back to the Joint Strike Fighter F-35b Variant Due to the Increased Cost, Technical Risk and Programme Delay Associated with Converting the Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers to Receive the Joint Strike Fighter Carrier Variant.

On 19 July 2012, the UK Took Delivery of Its First Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft at Lockheed Martin's Fort Worth Facility in Texas USA, which Commenced Flying Operations at Eglin Air Force Base Later that Year.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

The UK Took Delivery of Its Third F-35b Aircraft (BK-3), which Transferred to Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, on 25 June 2013. BK-3 Joined the US Marine Corps’ Marine Fighter Attack Training Squadron 501 (VMFAT 501) to Support Core Pilot and Maintainer Training. an Order Was Placed for a Fourth UK F-35b Aircraft in September 2013.

The Lightning II Main Gate 4 Business Case (MG4 BC) Was Endorsed by the Investment Approvals

Committee (IAC) in October 2013 and Obtained HM Treasury Approval in January 2014. the Lightning II MG4 BC Sought Approval to Procure the Aircraft for the First UK Squadron with all Associated Support Equipment and Capital Spares. the Business Case also Approved the Procurement of Freedom of Action (FoA) Facilities, and all Associated Support Contracts, which will Enable the Transition of the Aircraft from the US to the UK, Delivery of Initial Operating Capability from RAF Marham in December 2018, and Permit Initial First of Class Flying Trials to Take Place Aboard the New Queen Elizabeth Class Carrier in the Same Year. the MG4 BC Approval Provides for the Support Contracts to Cover the Period 2015 to 2020.

Main Gate 4 Set the Operational in Service Date (ISD) for the UK Lightning II Aircraft as 31 December 2018.

During the MPR14 Reporting Period, the First Three British Operational Pilots Completed their Training to Enable Them to Fly the F-35 and are Now Flying Regularly from Eglin AFB, FL.

## A.5. Capability Risks

The Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010 Confirmed the Need for Joint Strike Fighter which Forms the Backbone of Carrier Enabled Power Projection. if the UK Did not Acquire Joint Strike Fighter it Would be Unable to Meet Its Combat Air and Carrier Enabled Power Projection Requirements and be Unable to Support Ground Forces in Multi Threat Environments at a Time and Place of the Government’s Choosing.

Joint Strike Fighter Brings No Significant Risks to Other Projects, but Relies Heavily on the Queen Elizabeth Class Carrier Programme to Deliver Suitable Carriers to Introduce a Carrier Strike Capability Around 2020.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date / Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class (Future Aircraft Carrier)</Td>
<td>
Initial Operating Capability: Ship 1 (Queen Elizabeth) – July 2015
</Td>
<td>
Post Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>system Development
&amp; Demonstration (SDD)</Td>
<td>lockheed Martin

(Air System Prime)

&amp;
Pratt and Whitney (Propulsion System Prime)</Td>
<td>system Development and Demonstration</Td>
<td>cost Plus Award Fee, Subject to a Maximum Price</Td>
<td>competitive International Collaboration

Procurement. UK Participation Through

Memorandum of Understanding Agreement. (Note:
The Contract is Placed by the US Department of Defense Who then Contract Lockheed Martin and Pratt &amp;
Whitney on UK MOD Behalf)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>production, Sustainment &amp; Follow on Development (PSFD)</Td>
<td>lockheed Martin

(Air System Prime)

&amp;
Pratt and Whitney

(Propulsion System

Prime)</Td>
<td>initial

Operational Test

&amp; Evaluation Aircraft</Td>
<td>cost Plus Award Fee, Subject to a Maximum Price.</Td>
<td>competitive International Collaboration Procurement. UK Participation Through Memorandum of Understanding Agreement. (Note:
The Contract is Placed by the US Department of Defense Who then Contract Lockheed Martin and Pratt &amp;
Whitney on UK MOD Behalf)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>the Long Term Support Strategy for the Joint Strike Fighter Programme is Currently under Development and will not be Fully Determined until the System Design and Demonstration Phase is Formally Completed. Current Proposals Assume that Lockheed Martin and Pratt &amp;
Whitney will Provide a Contracted for Availability Solution Around a Performance Based Logistics Approach.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>150</Td>
<td>144</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>150</Td>
<td>144</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name                      | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| System Development & Demonstration              | \-                       | 1874                  | 2060                      |
| Production, Sustainment & Follow on Development | \-                       | 3748                  | 4199                      |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>system Development &amp; Demonstration</Td>
<td>1874</Td>
<td>1759</Td>
<td>-115</Td>
<td>+176</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>production, Sustainment
&amp; Follow on Development</Td>
<td>3748</Td>
<td>3277</Td>
<td>-471</Td>
<td>-377</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>5622</Td>
<td>5036</Td>
<td>-586</Td>
<td>-201</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 System Development & Demonstration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>may 13</Td>
<td>
+57
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>
A Number of System Development &amp; Demonstration (SDD) Activities Have Been Costed Against the Production Sustainment &amp; Follow on Development (PSFD) Project Code as it Had Previously Been Assumed that SDD Would Have Concluded by 2016. in Accordance with the US Driven Slip of SDD to 2019 all Costs Related to These Activities Should Now Fall to where They Were Originally Approved, E.g. the MG1 SDD Approval. Includes +£17m CVF Integration;
+£11m Initial Operational Test
&amp;evaluation (IOT&amp;E) MOU; +£12m Integrated Test Force; (-£10m) Project Support, +£9m Weapons;
+£4m Reprogramming; +£4m Representative Sustainment Integration Testing (RSIT); +£3m Cutlass; +£3m Communications Navigation Identification (CNI) Trials;
+£4m Combination of Other Activities.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>september 2013</Th>
<th>+63</Th>
<th>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Th>
<th>mpr14: At Annual Budgeting Cycle 14 (ABC14) QRPC1 Movement of some PSFD Risks to SDD c.£7M, Plus Major Risk Review at ABC14 Q2 +£49m, Including Shipbourne Rolling Vertical Landing (SRVL +£7m) Due to Uncertainty Parameters Set on the Costings. Base Cost for this Activity Has not Increased Since MPR13.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>september 2013</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>mpr14: Reduction of 'Conformitie European (CE) Markings' Cost. Original Assumption Was that this Was a Unique UK Requirement, However Later Information Showed this Cost Could be Shared with Other EU Participants.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>april 2014</Td>
<td>+2.4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>mpr14: 14/15 Pilot Mask Activity and Risk to Life Model are New Requirements Added Since MPR13 (+£0.7m) Due to Realisation of Risk. JAFAN Ship Integration Risk Realised (+£1.5m). Bring Forward of more LOVF &amp; FOA Design Activity than Planned Prior to MG4 (+£0.2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>may 2013</Td>
<td>+65</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>mpr14: Approval for Ship Integration, Equipment and Trials Was Covered under MG1 However, Post SDSR10 the Associated Costings Were Attributed to the PSFD Project Code as it Was Assumed that SDD Would Have Concluded by 2016. in Accordance with the US Driven Slip to SDD of 2019, all Costs Related to These Activities Should Now Fall to where They Were Originally Approved, E.g. the MG1 SDD Approval - And Now Showing Within the MPR Reporting Window.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2014</Td>
<td>-0.6</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr14 in Year 2013/14 Exchange Rate Variance (-£2.3m). Exchange Rate Variance 2014/15 to 2021/22 (+£1.7m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr13: 12/13 in Year Variance.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>accounting

Adjustments and Re-

Definitions</Td>
<td>mpr13: Correction of an Accrual Related to a UK Study into Pilot Flight Equipment.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+20</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr13: Development of Interim Solution to Deal with Potential Gap in Re-Programming Capability (+£5m). Review of Risk and Issues Relating to UK Integration Work, Including Aircraft &amp; Weapons Certification (+£15m) and Review Integration Risks (+£5m). Revised Financial Profiles Received from the Joint Programme Office - MOU Safety Case (-£1.6m) and Operational Test &amp; Evaluation MOU Contribution (£-1m). Technical Support Contract Cost not Realised Due to Change in Contracting Scope (£-2.8m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-3</Th>
<th>changed Capability Requirements</Th>
<th>mpr13: Tasks No Longer Relevant to a Carrier Variant Programme so Removed, Carrier Variant Add Ons (-£39m). Stop Work Order Imposed on Carrier Variant Future (Queen Elizabeth Class) Integration Development Contract During Period of Revision Resulting in Underspend (-£4m). Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Specific Costs Added Back in - Ship Borne Rolling Vertical Landing Solution (£+40m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr12: Exchange Rate Fluctuations Through Financial Year 2011/12</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-20</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr12: Reclassification of UK Specific Work as Development Focussed Rather than Production (+£9m). Slower than Anticipated Progress on Ship/Air Integration Work (-£5m). Reduced Levels of UK Specific Risk Mitigations Being Required (-£18m). Qualification of UK Weapons for Carriage on F-35 (+£14m). Delays to Work Supporting UK's Transition to the Carrier Variant Post Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review (-£9m). Reduced Levels of Engineering Support Required for UK Specific Development Tasks (-£11m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+13</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reassessment of Risk Mitigation Activities in Relation to Reprogramming (+£5m) and Ship/Air Integration (+£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>accounting

Adjustments and Re-

Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of IRDEL (Foreign Exchange) as per Revised Departmental Policy.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr2011 in Year 2010/11 Exchange Rate Variance (-£3m). Exchange Rate Variance 2011/12 to 2013/14 (-£4m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+59</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>creation and Ongoing Funding of an Engineering Authority +£9m. +£50m Due to the Joint Strike Fighter's Technical Baseline Review Impact On:
a) the System Development and Demonstration Now Completing in 2015/16 (+£58m), b) in-Year Delays and Revised Short-Term Plans (-£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-31</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>deletion of the Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing Key User Requirement Due to the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Decision to Change Aircraft Variant.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-16</Td>
<td>accounting

Adjustments and Re-

Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+37</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr2010 in Year 2009/10 Exchange Rate Variance (+£12m). Exchange Rate Variance 2010/11 to 2013/14 (+£25m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-21</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>cost Reductions and Re-Profiling of UK National Requirements (-£15m), Correction of Effect of System Development &amp; Demonstration Contribution Non-Financial Contributions (+£1m), Revision of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation Contribution (-£2m), Reduced Forecast for Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing Risk Mitigation (-£5m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-100</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr2009 in Year 2008/09 Exchange Rate Variance (+£4m). Exchange Rate Variance 2009/10 to 2013/14 (+£2m).mpr08: System Development and Demonstration Contribution Against MPR07 Versus MPR08 Exchange Rate: 2007/08 (-£12m), 2008/09 to 13/14 (-£6m). MPR07: Exchange Rate Against Profile until 2013 (-£11m). Change in Dollar/Pound Exchange Rate (MPR06
+£9m; MPR05 -£181m; MPR04
-£85m; MPR03 -£9m; MPR02 +£189m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-25</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>mpr09: In Year Out Turn Against Forecast – Risk Mitigation Action Leading to Minimal Level of Unforeseen Activities Emerging (-£10m), Ship Borne Rolling Vertical Landing (-£8m) Due to Overestimate of the Work Required at this Stage of the Programme, Slippage in the Integration of JCA with the Future Aircraft Carriers (-£6m) Due to Slower than Anticipated Progress, Correction of in Year System Development &amp;
Demonstration Contribution (+£2m). Re-Profiling of Future Years Comprising of Ship Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing – Reassessment of the Funding Required to Return the Aircraft with a Higher Payload (-£1m), Updated Assessment of the Expected Implementation Work Supporting the Autonomic Logistics Information System – a Global System for all Maintenance and Spares for Joint Strike Fighter (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>an Increase Due to Joint Safe Escape
– the Ability to Deploy Weapons Safely (+£1m) which Was not Previously Explicitly Forecast, Refinement of Risk Mitigation Funding for Future Years (-£4m), Reduction of Safety Case – a Requirement to Ensure the Aircraft is Fit to Fly (-£2m) Due to the Cost to the UK Being Reduced by the Contribution of Partner Nations.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-1</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>mpr08: In Year Out Turn Against Forecast – Including Minor Changes for 2007/08 (-£14m). UK Non System Development and Demonstration National Work; Changes to Reflect Realism: UK Precision Guided Bomb (-£7m), Carrier Variant Future Integration (+£1m) and Operational Test and Evaluation (-£7m). Maturation of Risk Identified Since Equipment Plan 07: Autonomic Logistic Information System (+£5m), Conformity European Markings (+£6m), Re-Assessment of Risk (+£6m). Re-Assessment of Main Programme Expenditure: Mission Support (+£2m), Reprogramming (+£10m), Bowman (+£4m). Planning Round 08 Option not Included in Equipment Plan07 (-£7m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+279</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>mpr07: Re-Assessment of UK National Work - Attributable Cost which Include: UK Integration Costs: (-£94m), Block 3 Weapons Adjusted to Reflect the Latest Costing from Prime Contractor (+£7m), Safety Case Now Defined to Prepare for Contract Placement in 2007/08 (+£11m) and Re-Assessment of Risk Provision (-£87m). Break Out from Reassessment from Risk Provision above which Are: UK Basing Integration &amp; Testing (+£5m), Identification of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation Costs (+£26m). Outturn for 2006/07 Versus Forecast (-£6m). Adjustment for Realism in the Cost of the UK Non- System Development and Demonstration Work Resulting from a Deeper Review of the Estimates Originally Provided by the US (+£43m).costs Benefits Gained from Use of Existing Advance. Short Range Air to Air Missile Stocks for Joint Combat Aircraft Trials (-£6m). Fewer Weapon Studies Undertaken in Year (-£1m). Improved Project Support Strategy (-£3m). Better Understanding of the Integrated Nature and Requirements of the Aircraft Systems (+£384m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-34</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>
MPR06: Re-Profile of UK National Work to Mitigate Increase in Exchange Rate. Main Drivers are Interoperability (-£1m), Capital Studies (-£1m), UK Integrated Helmet Mounted Display System

(-£1m) and Carrier Vessel Future Integration (-£3m). Re-Profile of Later Years Follow on Development (-£3m).mpr05: Reassessment of Dstl
&amp; QinetiQ Tasking (-£10m). Correction of Contingency Estimates Due to Weight Risks in MPR04

(-£15m).
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-13</Td>
<td>accounting

Adjustments and Re-

Definitions</Td>
<td>
MPR07: The Integrated Project Team Conducted a Review of the Project Work Schedule which Has Given the Team Sufficient Certainty to Include more Accurate Accruals for the Duration of the Project (-£10m). Accounting Adjustment Made in

MPR06 Now Reflected in Re-Profiling of Programme (-£2m). New Defence Procurement Agency Requirement to Include Price Forecasting Group Costs Within the Equipment Plan (+£1m). Accounting Reclassification of Feasibility Studies (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>accounting

Adjustments and Re-

Definitions</Td>
<td>mpr06: Change of Accounting Treatment for System Development and Demonstration Contributions. (+£19m) Re-Profile of 2005/06 Accrual into Later Years. (-£18m) Removal of 2005/06 Accrual. Reconciliation of Accrual (+£1m). MPR05: Re Profiling of UK Specific Tasks (+£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-71</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
MPR06: Reviews of the External Missile Systems for Joint Combat Aircraft Resulted in the Removal of the Requirement for Integrating Internally Mounted Brimstone (-£41m),

Paveway II and III (-£1m) Capabilities and some Internal Configurations of the Advanced Short Range Air-to-Air Missile (-£49m). Further UK Participation in the Joint Integrated Test Force to Reflect UK Acceptance into Service Strategy (+£20m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-472</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
MPR05: Provision for Alternate Helmet Mounted Display System Removed (-£40m). Reassessment of 2004/05 Forecast Expenditure (-£12m). Review of Miscellaneous Requirement Including Exchange of Letters Risk Provision (-£40m), Design of UK Specific Support (-£3m), Environmental Protection

(-£3m) and Autonomic Logistic Information System Interoperability (-£6m). Block IV Weapons as a Result of JSF Programme Re-Alignment (-£368m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Historic

+55

Technical

Factors

MPR07: Re

\-

Alignment of Programme

Now Included in Development - Ship-

Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing

£55m).

(+

Historic

-29

Technical

Factors

MPR05: Reduction of Risk Line as a

Result of Programme Delays (

\-

£29m).

Historic

-7

Budgetary

Factors

Fewer UK Studies than Originally

Planned (MPR02 -£1m; MPR03

(

\-

£6m)

.

Historic

+87

Technical

Factors

MPR 04: Re

\-

Examination of Risk

Within the Overall Programme.

(+

£87m

).

Net Variation (£m)

-

115

### B.3.1.2 Production, Sustainment & Follow on Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>december 13</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>
Risk Differential

(Post Main-Gate Only)</Td>
<td>mpr14: ABC14 QRPC3 Financial Risk and Cost Model Uncertainty Review Resulting in -£1m and -£2m Cost Changes Respectively.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>october 13</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr14: Engine Modifications - Expected Increase in Engine Modification Costs Based on Latest JPO Estimate of Cost.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>september 13</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr14: Tooling Estimate Originally Based on Figures from the JPO. This Costing Has Now Been Updated to Reflect the Actual Committed Value Negotiated by the JPO. Latest Revision of Financial Management Procedures Document (PSFD) Tables (Revision 6) Provided During the FY, Costing Updated to Align with Latest Profile. Costing at MPR14 Includes an Additional Year's CSR (FY15) in Relation to the Corresponding Additional Approval Value. to Note: Approval for CSR FY14 Was Estimated for MPR13. Subsequently an Adjustment Has Been Made in the Approval Value at MPR14 as the Final Figures Have Been Endorsed by HMT.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>october 13</Td>
<td>-14</Td>
<td>accounting

Adjustments and Re-

Definitions</Td>
<td>mpr14: IY13/14 Outturn is Lower than Previous Forecast Due to Reduction in Actual vs Planned Flying Hours. FY14/15 Variance is Due to FY14/15 Portion of LRIP 7 Sustainment Being Duplicated Between MG3 and MG4 Approvals.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>january 14</Th>
<th>-118</Th>
<th>accounting

Adjustments and Re-

Definitions/
Procurement Processes</Th>
<th>
MPR14. Production MG2-3: (-£35m) Decrease in Forecast Costs Due to Actual Contract Costs Being less than Planned. LRIP7 Contract Values are less than that Approved via MG3 RN2. There are also Production and Sustainment Cost Reductions for LRIP3, LRIP4 and LRIP8 Long Lead Costs Being less than Estimated Within MPR13. MPR14. Production MG4:
(-£83m) Total Decrease in Forecast Costs Due To; a Reduction in the Uncertainty Assumptions Embedded Within ABC14 (£22m); Removal of LRIP8 Long Lead Costs (£37m) Due to FY14/15 Portion of LRIP8 Being Duplicated Between MG3 RN2 and MG4 Approvals; and Reduction in Costs in the First Decade Due to Amended URF Scenario Risks Applied to the ABC14 QRPC3 Costings (£24m) to Account for the Reduction in Partner Jets.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>january 14</Td>
<td>-256</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>
MPR14: £204m is Included in the Main Gate 4 Business Case for FOREX Risk, However No Forecast Provided Against this as Future £/$ FOREX Rates are not Known, Thus

-£204m Variance. Variations Between MG2-4 FOREX Rates and Annual Budget Cycle (ABC) Corporate Planning Rate are Favourable to the UK and Therefore Result in an Additional Variance of -£37m Across the Approval Period. Additional in Year (FY13/14) FOREX Variation of -£15m Between Planning and Actual Rates.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-29</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>
MPR13: FOREX Risk Approval Now Included for Main Gate 3. Variation to Planning Rate Does not Result in Consumption of Risk Pot (£-32m). 12/13 IY FOREX Variation (£+3m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
MPR13: Increase in Cost of Sustainment. MPR 13 Based on Contracting Evidence Vice United States Government (USG) Estimate at MPR12 (£+24m). Concurrency Development Cost Estimates Based on Improved USG Data, Reduced from $14m to $8m per Aircraft (£-12m). Low Rate Initial Production 3 Contract Production Cost Increase Due to Correction of USG Accounting Approach (£+9m). the First Two Jets Were Grounded for a Number of Weeks Due to Technical Issues Resulting in Reduced Flying Rates (£-9m). Revised Estimates Received from USG, with Improved Forecast for
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>tooling and Follow on Development Common Costs (£-5m, £-19m). Value of Low Rate Initial Production 7 Long Lead Production Contract Higher than Estimated at MPR12 (£+2m). Production Overhead &amp; Admin Common Programme Costs Increased to Reflect Latest Version of the USG MOU Financial Management Plan (£+3m). Partner Reprogramming Lab Common Costs Detailed in the MOU Financial Management Plan Superseded by Development of the Interim Solution - Cost Now Profiled under SDD Approval (£-3m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>mpr13: Flight Test Instrumentation (FTI) Equipment Ordered under LRIP5 Contract to Support Operational Test Aircraft Purchase under LRIP 7. Delay in Buying Equipment Due to Reversion to Carrier Variant and Then, Back to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr12 Exchange Rate Fluctuations Through Financial Year 2011/12.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+26</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr12 the F35 Programme Runs Concurrent Development and Production Programmes to Deliver Advanced Capability Earlier than under Legacy Programmes. This Variance Represents the Cost Against the 3 UK Aircraft Purchased to Date of Design Changes Uncovered During Production which Require Re-Design Work and Implementation of Modifications.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>mpr12: Estimates for over Target Costs on the First Two UK Production Contracts (+£8m). Diminished Manufacturing Supplies (+£2m). Decreased Contract Preparation Costs (-£2m). Correction of Levels of Shared Non-Recurring Programme Costs (+£2m). Increased Costs for Aircraft and Engine Spares (+£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>mpr12 Due to the Decision to Change Variant under the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review the Requirement for Flight Test Instrumentation Was Removed from the Third Aircraft.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr12 the Delayed Delivery of the First UK Aircraft Has Delayed Commencement of UK Flying Operations from that per the Original Approval and Therefore Reduced the Cost of Flying in the Relevant Time Period.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-40</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>no Operational Conversion Unit is Now Required in the Early Years and as Such Support Costs in the Early Years of Flying Aircraft Have Been Reduced.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Historic

-28

Exchange Rate

MPR2011: Exchange Rate Variation

(

\-

£28m).

Historic

-11

Budgetary

Factors

Improved Estimate of Production

Expenditure (-£12m). Delays in Long

Lead Expenditure (+£1m).

Historic

+31

Exchange Rate

MPR2010: Exchange Rate Variation

).

£31m

(+

Historic

-3

Budgetary

Factors

Correction of Composite Share Ratio

(

UK Contribution to Shared Partner

Costs) from MPR09 (

\-

£3m).

Historic

-30

Procurement

Processes

Improved Understanding of

Production Cost Data Related

Specifically to Operational Test &

Evaluation Aircraft (

\-

£30m).

Net Variation (£m)

-

471

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost – N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>144</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>144</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>1971</Td>
<td>135</Td>
<td>2106</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>2115</Td>
<td>135</Td>
<td>2250</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main

Investment

Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
January 2001
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability[^1]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>december 2018</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>
Initial Operating Capability – Declaration of the Ability of the UK Lightning Force to be Able to Undertake Contingent Operations.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>
December 2018
</Td>
<td>december 2018</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation – N/a

## C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – N/a

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Progress to Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>
Yet to be Defined
</Td>
<td>
The Transition from IOC in December 2018 to FOC (April 2023) will be Set Out in Main Gate 5 Post 2017.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

## C.5.1. Scope of Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

## C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Contract Go-Live Date – N/a

## C.5.3. Progress Against Approved End of Support / Training / PFI Contract Date – N/a

## C.5.4. Other Costs Resulting from Support Cost Variation – N/a

## C.5.5. Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Support Contract Variation – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>production Sustainment
&amp; Follow-on Development</Td>
<td>95 Green</Td>
<td>92 Green</Td>
<td>psfd is on Track to Deliver F-35 Initial Operating Capability December 2018.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Design and Development</Td>
<td>97 Green</Td>
<td>92 Green</Td>
<td>
No Significant Change to SDD which Has a Forecast Completion Date of 1<sup>st</Sup> April 2019.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Initial 10 Force Elements @ Readiness.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Sufficient Trained and Available Personnel.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
Successful Integration of Autonomic Logistics and Global Sustainment (ALGS) into UK and Joint Supply Chain.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Completion of Freedom of Action (FoA) and Non-FoA Build at Main Operating Base.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Sufficient Suitable Personnel Available for Training and Support.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Doctrine in Place.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Suitable Structures in Place to Support 17 (R) Sqn (US Based Operational Test and Evaluation Squadron) Operational Conversion Unit and all 617 Sqn Operations at MOB.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Integration of Lightning II into UK IT Infrastructure and Air C2 Networks.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (5)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>jun-14</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
MPR14: Equipment Risks are Being Managed by the PT.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>jun-14</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
MPR14: Training Risks are Being Managed by Training DLoD.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>jun-14</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
MPR14: Infrastructure Risks are Being Managed by Infrastructure DLoD.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>jun-14</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
MPR14: Logistics Risks are Being Managed by Logistics DLoD.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>jun-14</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
MPR14: Information Risks are Being Managed by Information DLoD.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>mpr13: Following the Reversion Decision There is Reliance on US Marine Corps Training System for Initial Throughput and Training of Early Instructor Pilots and Squadron Pilots. Lack of Knowledge of 5th Generation Tactics, Training and Procedures, Low Observable Aircraft Employment and Integration with 4th Generation Aircraft and Other Defence Assets may Limit Initial Capability. 5th Generation is a New Capability for the UK with Little/No Current Suitably Qualified Personnel. the Ability to Assessing and Maintain the Low Observable Characteristics of the Aircraft is Essential to Optimise Capability. Lead Time to Generate Suitably Qualified Personnel is Estimated to be in the Order of Five Years.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>mpr13: The Location of the Lightning Main Operating Base Has Now Been Announced Allowing the Lightning Basing Project to Progress to Initial Gate (Dec 13) and the Assessment Phase. Risk Relates to Aggressive Timeline to Meet First Aircraft Arrival from 1 Apr 2018. Insufficient Maritime Intra-Theatre Lift to Support Joint Combat Aircraft Aboard Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>lack of a Through-Life Sustainment Solution for Joint Strike Fighter. Insufficient Maritime Intra-Theatre Lift to Support Joint Combat Aircraft Aboard Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>uk Ground Information Infrastructure may be Unable to Support the Requirements of Joint Combat Aircraft Information Systems.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1. Lightning II Key User Requirements as Laid Down in the LII User Requirement Document V7.0

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm (KUR)</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Equipment

/ Training</Td>
<td>operate in Hostile Environments</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Equipment

/

Information
</Td>
<td>interoperability</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>take Off and Landing Performance</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Equipment / Doctrine
</Td>
<td>combat Radius</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>mission Reliability</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>sortie Generation Rate</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>logistic Footprint</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (3)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Programme Has Made Significant Progress in Understanding the Technical Challenge Associated with Signature Management. Furthermore, Main Gate 4 Introduces Options for LOVF to be Taken Forward for Approval in 2014.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>changed Assessment Based on Current Programme Progress Towards Meeting both Availability and Mission Reliability Targets.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>ongoing Absence of a Long Term Autonomic Logistic Support Solution is a Key JSF Programme Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>work Carried Out over the Last 12 Months in the BAeS Owned Validation Facility / Validation &amp; Acceptance Laboratory Have Progressed the UK's Understanding of Information Exchange Requirements, with Links that Could also Further Our Knowledge and Development of Defence Operational Training Capability (Air).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous Key Performance Measure (KPM) Referred to Carrier Variant Recovery Mission Performance and Was Reported in MPR12 as "At Risk". Following the May 12 Announcement to Revert to the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant this KPM Was Switched Back to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Recovery and Replaced with the US Programme KPM Measuring the Vertical Lift Performance of the Aircraft. (This Reverses the Historical Record of Removal of Short Take Off and Vertical Landing KPM Post Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review10). the Previous 'Work-Stop' on SRVL Has Been Lifted and the Development of the Manoeuvre is Now a Core PT Activity.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>3</Th>
<th>changed Capability Requirements</Th>
<th>previous KPM Referred to Carrier Variant Combat Radius (590nm). Following the May 12 Announcement to Revert to the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant this KPM Has Been Removed and Replaced with the US Programme KPM for Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Combat Radius (450nm).combat Radius Now Assessed Against USMC F-35b HHH Flight Profile and is Assessed as Forecast to be Met Since the Aircraft Currently Performing to the Programme Combat Radius Key Performance Parameter.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Programme Manager Assessed that the UK’s Aspirations for Interoperability using the Carrier Variant of the Joint Strike Fighter Were more Complex than Initially Thought. This Could Lead to Cost Growth on the Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Carrier Landing Speed of the Carrier Variant Remains at the Limit of the Joint Strike Fighter US Key Performance Parameter of 145kts and is a Watch Item.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>concerns over Ability for the UK to Generate Sufficient Suitably Qualified and Equipped Personnel in 5th Generation Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous Report of "At Risk" Referred to Concerns on the Performance of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant. Following the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Announcement to Change Procurement Strategy and using US Indices this is Now Assessed as
"Forecast to be Met".</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous KPM Referred to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Mission Performance and Was Reported in MPR10 as "At Risk". Following the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Announcement to Change the Procurement Strategy to Procure the Carrier Variant this KPM Has Been Removed and Replaced the US Programme KPM for Carrier Variant Recovery Measuring the Landing Speed Onto the Carrier.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous Report of "At Risk" Referred to Concerns on the Performance of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant. Following the Strategic Defence &amp; Securtiy Review Announcement to Change Procurement Strategy and using US Indices this is Now Assessed as "Met Forecast".</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>3</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>based on Modelling and Simulation Results, the Range Capability for Joint Strike Fighter Short Take Off and Vertical Landing is Approaching the Specified Target Set for UK Requirements Based on UK Operating Scenarios. However, this Potential Shortfall is Based Primarily on Modelling with Very Limited Experience in Actual Flight Test. Further Flight Testing is Planned to Gain an Accurate Assessment of this Potential Problem and Mitigation Actions will be Developed Accordingly.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>this KUR Represents a Measure of the Amount of Support Equipment Required to Allow Joint Combat Aircraft to be Deployed on Operations. as the Joint Strike Fighter System Design Has Matured, the Amount and Design of Equipment Required for Deployment in Support of Joint Combat Aircraft Has Reduced to Below the Contractually Specified Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Short Take Off Element of KUR 04 (Based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be Changed in the Ongoing KUR Review, Although Current Projections Indicate Robust Short Take Off Performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight Challenges and Propulsion System Integration Issues Place the Vertical Landing Bring Back Element of KUR 04 at Increased Risk; the Integrated Project Team Has Commenced Programme Action to Amend the System Development and Demonstration Contract to Satisfy a Requirement to Undertake Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>subject to Intensive Programme Action by Prime Contractor. Funded Design Options that Significantly Reduce Risk Have Been Identified and Further Changes will be Considered in Due Course.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous Key Performance Measure Referred to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Mission Performance and Was Reported in MPR10 as "At Risk". Following the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Announcement to Change the Procurement Strategy to Procure the Carrier Variant this Key Performance Measure Has Been Removed and Replaced the US Programme Key Performance Measure for Carrier Variant Recovery Measuring the Landing Speed Onto the Carrier.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>based on Modelling and Simulation Results, the Range Capability for Joint Strike Fighter Short Take Off and Vertical Landing is Approaching the Specified Target Set for UK Requirements Based on UK Operating Scenarios. However, this Potential Shortfall is Based Primarily on Modelling with Very Limited Experience in Actual Flight Test. Further Flight Testing is Planned to Gain an Accurate Assessment of this Potential Problem and Mitigation Actions will be Developed Accordingly.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>this KUR Represents a Measure of the Amount of Support Equipment Required to Allow Joint Combat Aircraft to be Deployed on Operations. as the Joint Strike Fighter System Design Has Matured, the Amount and Design of Equipment Required for Deployment in Support of Joint Combat Aircraft Has Reduced to Below the Contractually Specified Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Short Take Off Element of KUR 04 (Based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be Changed in the Ongoing KUR Review, Although Current Projections Indicate Robust Short Take Off Performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight Challenges and Propulsion System Integration Issues Place the Vertical Landing Bring Back Element of KUR 04 at Increased Risk; the Integrated Project Team Has Commenced Programme Action to Amend the System Development and Demonstration Contract to Satisfy a Requirement to Undertake Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>subject to Intensive Programme Action by Prime Contractor. Funded Design Options that Significantly Reduce Risk Have Been Identified and Further Changes will be Considered in Due Course.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>the Inability to Achieve Mission Reliability is a Watch Item, Since it will Have an Impact on Achievement of Desired Sortie Generation Rate and Mission Success.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>the Reversion to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Makes the UK Interoperable with USMC / Italian F-35b with Potential for Joint Operations from Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers, Subject to Further Work to Address Specific Weapon Clearances and Operational Limitations and is Now Regarded as 'To be Met'.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant Currently Meets the Joint Strike Fighter Programme KPP for Combat Radius so this Measure is Now Regarded as 'To be Met'.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>the Full Solution to Deliver a Shipborne Rolling Vertical Recovery Manoeuvre Still Remains Immature. Simulator / Trial Work Scheduled Ahead of First of Class Flying Trials on Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers in 2018.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>reduced Interoperability may Limit Opportunities for Allied Aircraft to Operate from the Decks of Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>action Taken by Community of Interest 1 Community and Air Command to Engage with US Air Force to Understand Support Requirements to Maintain Low Observable Characteristics will Address this KPM. US National Disclosure Policy and UK Access to Required Data Remain Issues to Overcome.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>joint Strike Fighter Programme Development Action will Address this Key Performance Measure.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>as a Result of the Decision of Purchase the Carrier Variant this Measure is Now Regarded as to be Met.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>as a Result of the Decision of Purchase the Carrier Variant this Measure is Now Regarded as to be Met.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>as a Result of the 2010 Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Decision to Purchase the Carrier Variant, this Measure is Now Assessed as 'To be Met'.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>inability to Strike some Targets at the Extreme Range Capability of Aircraft and Weapon System.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>severely Limits the Operational Effectiveness of the Platform and Result in High Waste of Weapons.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a

[^1]: Rather than Passing an Initial Gate, Lightning II Has Used a Tailored Main Gate Strategy Based on an Incremental Approach to Approvals.
