---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Airseeker
Page_from: 34.0
Page_to: 49.0
Project_label: Airseeker
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_34_49.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Airseeker
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Airseeker Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore C Jones (Command, Control, Communications and Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance
</Td>
<td>16th April 2012</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects /
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Airseeker
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Project Airseeker Seeks to Sustain the UK’s Airborne Electronic Surveillance Capability Previously Provided by the Nimrod R1 Aircraft and Associated Ground Elements, Against an Evolving and Increasingly Complex Target Set Up to 2025. It will Provide a Rapidly Deployable Capability to Support Operations where it will be Able to Collect, Analyse, Fuse and Disseminate a Coherent and Readily Interpretable Electronic Surveillance Picture in Support of National, Joint and Coalition Operations. This Information will Support Targeting and Combat Identification.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Whilst the Original Concept of the Project Was for the Procurement of a Modern Mission System to Fit into Existing Nimrod R1 Aircraft, in the Run Up to Initial Gate Approval, Other Platform Options Were Introduced and Were Subject to Detailed Assessment During Development of the Main Gate Business Case. the Assessment also Considered Ground Analysis Facilities, Training Facilities and a Support Solution to the Planned Out of Service Date of 2025.

The Project Received Initial Gate Approval in August 2003. Eight Contractors Were Invited to Participate in a Capability-Based Assessment and Three Were Chosen to Go Forward to a Competitive-Based Threestage Assessment Phase in April 2004.

The First Stage Required the Contractors to Show their Understanding of the Requirement, and Resulted in a Down-Select to Two Contractors in April 2005.

In the Second Stage the Remaining Two Contractors Were Required to Define the System to Meet the Capability, Proving their Design Through Operational Effectiveness Modelling. This Resulted in a Downselect to a Preferred Contractor in April 2007.

When the Down-Selected Contractor Commenced the Final Stage of the Assessment Phase, a Risk Reduction Exercise, it Became Evident that the Cost of Supporting the Nimrod R1, as the Planned Host Platform, Was Likely to be Significantly Greater than Anticipated.

Due to this Cost Escalation a Change in Strategy Was Made in 2008 to Focus the Remainder of the Assessment Phase on an Investigation of an Alternative to the Nimrod R1 as the Host Platform.

Work Was Undertaken to Obtain a Robust Performance, Time and Cost Envelope and a Main Gate Business Case Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in December 2009 Recommending Procurement of the United States Air Force Rivet Joint System under a Foreign Military Sales Arrangement.

After Defence Board Consideration of the Project’s Cost and Programme Assumptions Within the Context of the Department’s 2010 Financial Planning Round, the Main Gate Business Case Was Updated Through a Review Note and an Addendum. the Investment Approvals Board Approved the

Enter Text Hereupdated Business Case in March 2010.

Signature of the Foreign Military Sales Letter of Offer and Acceptance Followed that Approval.

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

As from 1st April 2010 Helix Became Known as Airseeker.

1.  Letter of Offer and Acceptance Was Signed on Behalf of the UK Government on 19 March 2010 which Included a Request for the USA Government to Prepare and Submit a Revision to that Letter Reflecting the Planning Round 2010 Settlement. Their Formal Response Was Received on 28 October 2010. Investment

Approvals Board Approval to Sign the Revised Offer Letter Was Received on 24 March 2011. the Revised Letter of Offer and Acceptance Was Signed on Behalf of the UK Government on 24 March 2011. the Revision to the Offer Letter Has Been Augmented by Additional Information on How the USA Government Programme Office, Known as Big Safari, Intends Making Contractual Commitments on Behalf of the UK. the USA Government Has Been Implementing the Initial Stages of the Foreign Military Sales Agreement in Accordance with a Plan that is Consistent with the Planning Round 2010 Settlement. a Major Milestone Was Achieved on 14 December 2010 when the First Donor Aircraft for Conversion to Become the First UK Rivet Joint Aircraft Was Taken into Work at the USA Facility in Texas.

In September 2010, Royal Air Force Headquarters Air Command Signed an Agreement Known as the Co-Manning Memorandum of Understanding with the Operational Wing of the USA Air Force that Operates the Rivet Joint Aircraft and Ground Systems. This Agreement Makes Provision for UK Crews to be Trained by the USA Air Force, Funded under the Foreign Military Sales Case that is Managed by the Airseeker Project Team, and then Allocated to Operational Duties by the USA Air Force Rivet Joint Commander. the First of the RAF Personnel Started Training in January 2011, with the First Graduates Ready for Operational Rivet Joint Deployments in June 2011. This Conversion Training and Operational Experience will Provide the Required Quantity of Trained Manpower to Meet the Initial Operating Capability Whilst Significantly De-Risking the Training Defence Line of Development.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

On 23 June 2011 the Chief of Defence Materiel Signed on Behalf of the Secretary of State for Defence a Memorandum of Understanding for Sustainment and Follow-on Development that Had Been Signed by the USA Under-Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) Earlier that Month, Covering a Cooperative Agreement to Provide Support and Capability Updates for the USA and UK Fleets of Rivet Joint Aircraft and Ground Systems. This Agreement Runs to 31 March 2025.

In September 2011 the Ministry of Defence's Investment Approvals Committee Approved the Cost and Time Parameters for the Airseeker Project Reflecting the Planning Round 2010 Settlement and the Revised Letter of Offer and Acceptance Submitted by the USA Government in March 2011. MPR2012 Section B Has Been Updated to Reflect the Approved Cost Estimates Rather than the Noted Cost Estimates Supplied for MPR2011.

The Refurbishment and Conversion of the KC-135 Tanker Aircraft that Forms the Basis of the First UK Rivet Joint Aircraft is Progressing Ahead of Schedule in Greenville Texas. the Contractor Encountered Technical Issues During the Strip of the Aircraft that Have all Been Addressed with No Impact to the Delivery Schedule and Has Taken the Opportunity to De-Risk Later Stages of the Conversion Programme by Advancing some Work when Resources Allowed this to be done.The Contractor Has also Made Purchases of Equipment that will Benefit Conversion of the Second and Third Aircraft. Delivery of the First Aircraft to the UK is Still Planned for December 2013.

Progress on the Co-Manning Memorandum of Understanding, Whereby the USA Air Force Trains and Provides Operational Experience for UK Aircrew is also on Schedule. in Early March 2012, 78 Aircrew Had Completed their Training at Offutt Air Force Base, 51 Aircrew Had Completed an Operational Deployment with the USA Air Force Rivet Joint Force in Two Operational Locations and There Were 10 Aircrew on Active Deployment at a Single Operational Location.

Design of the UK Facilities to House Ground Exploitation Equipment at the Joint Services Signals Unit (RAF Digby) Has Been Agreed with the Defence Infrastructure Organisation. Options to House the Aircraft Maintenance Facilities and Training Systems at the Main Operating Base (RAF Waddington) Have Been under Review and a Recommended Option Has Been Put to the Airseeker Project Board by the Defence Equipment and Support Project Team.

On 29 March 2012 the UK Completed a 3 Month Exercise to Investigate Availability of Technical Evidence Held by the USA Airforce that is Required to Support Development of an Aircraft Type Certification Safety Case and Release to Service in Furtherance of the Objectives Set Out in the Airseeker Safety and Airworthiness Strategy.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Loss of the Capability to be Provided by Project Airseeker Would Remove the UK’s Ability to Conduct Theatre-Level Airborne Electronic Surveillance in the Future. UK Forces Would be Denied the Ability to Acquire Timely Intelligence from Increasingly Complex and Rapidly Changing Electronic Sources in the Theatre Domain. This Would Significantly Reduce the Ability to Acquire, Process and Disseminate Signals, Communications and Electronic Intelligence to UK and Coalition Partners. Critically, the Principal Source of Tactical Data Essential to the Nature of Current Operations Would be Lost, Substantially Reducing the Ability to Conduct Effective Targeting and Information Operations.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>united States Government</Td>
<td>manufacture to Full Operational Capability</Td>
<td>letter of Acceptance</Td>
<td>foreign Military Sales</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 2%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="7">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="7"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="5">
The Majority of Through-Life Support Activities will be Covered under a Memorandum of Understanding Concerning Sustainment and Follow-on Development. the Conduct of the Co-Operative Support Programme under this Memorandum of Understanding will be Governed by a Joint Steering Committee. a Co-Operative Programme Office will be Established at the Main Contractor’s Facility in Greenville, Texas to Manage Day to Day Maintenance and Support of the Combined Fleet Together with Management of the Through-Life Upgrade Programme. the UK and USA will Jointly Man the Co-Operative Programme Office on the Basis of the Proposed Cost Share. Depth Maintenance will be Based at the Main Contractor’s Facility in Greenville, Texas which Currently Forms the Support Hub for the USA Air Force Fleet of Rivet Joint Aircraft.
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">support Title</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td Colspan="2">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">support and Follow on Development</Td>
<td>united States Government</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>co-Operative Agreement</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Memorandum of

Understanding</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a Proportion of Total

Estimated

Procurement Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>38</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
<td>6%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>38</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
<td>6%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI^1^

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>
621
</Td>
<td>
633
</Td>
<td>
706
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>633</Td>
<td>634</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>633</Td>
<td>634</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Airseeker

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>impact of in Year Exchange Rate Fluctuations. the Project Has a Separate Approved Risk Allocation for Exchange Rate Variation (£101.328m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2011</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>project Approval Based on July 2011 Corporately Mandated Forward Exchange Rates. the Latest Project Forecast Was Based on Exchange Rates Set for the Annual Planning Round in March 2011. the Variation is the Difference Between the Two Rates. the Project Has a Separate Approved Risk Allocation for Exchange Rate Variation (£101.328m) .</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 66%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>increment Title</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost^1^

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development</Td>
<td>633</Td>
<td>637</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>633</Td>
<td>637</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost B.4.1.1 Airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>september 2011</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>project Approval Based on July 2011 Corporately Mandated Forward Exchange Rates. the Latest Project Forecast Was Based on Exchange Rates Set for the Annual Planning Round in March 2011. the Variation is the Difference Between the Two Rates. the Project Has a Separate Approved Risk Allocation for Exchange Rate Variation (£101.328m) .</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.2. Operational Impact on Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Increment Title
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March

2011 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>38</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>38</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>15</Td>
<td>115</Td>
<td>130</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>3</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>53</Td>
<td>118</Td>
<td>171</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1

The Airseeker Approval Figures Have Been Updated this Year Because the Airseeker Approval Has Now Been Finalised.

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial

Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>august 2003</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>79</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>
July 2014
</Td>
<td>
October 2014
</Td>
<td>
August 2015
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>in-Service Date the in-Service Date is the Date at which the User will Have a Minimum Deployable Capability and Would Declare an Initial Operating Capability. Initial Operating Capability 1. Delivery of the Following Equipment Defence Lines of Development Elements in Accordance with the Project Airseeker Integrated Test, Evaluation and Acceptance Plan:
<ol Type="a">
<li>one Aircraft.</Li>
<li>ground Support Facilities at the Main Operating Base and Ground Analysis Facility.</Li>
<li>one Modular Processing System (Deployable Ground Station).</Li>
</Ol>
2. Provision of the Following Training Defence Lines of Development Elements:
<ol Type="a">
<li>declaration of Ready for Training Date.</Li>
<li>provision of Two Trained Air Crews.</Li>
<li>provision of Sufficient Trained Groundcrew and Mission Support Personnel to Support a  Deployment.</Li>
</Ol>
3. Provision of Declaration of Logistic Support Date.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>october 2014</Td>
<td>october 2014</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Airseeker

## C.3.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 6%" />
<col Style="Width: 73%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker</Td>
<td>initial Operating Capability with the Addition Of:
<ul>
<li>two Aircraft (Giving a Total of Three Aircraft)</Li>
<li>one Modular Processing System</Li>
</Ul>
(Giving a Total of Two)
<ul>
<li>one Airborne Capability Extension</Li>
</Ul>
System
<ul>
<li>one Mission Crew Training System</Li>
<li>one Maintenance Crew Training</Li>
</Ul>
System
<ul>
<li>two Trained Air Crews (Giving a Total of Four)</Li>
<li>fully Trained Support and Maintenance Personnel.</Li>
</Ul></Td>
<td>
Progress is on Track to Meet the Full Operating Capability via the Foreign

Military Sales Case for the Rivet Joint Procurement Together with the Co-
Manning and Sustainment and Followon Development Memoranda of Understanding with the USA.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.1. Scope of Support / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>scope</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development</Td>
<td>the Conduct of the Co-Operative Support Programme under this Memorandum of Understanding will be Governed by a Joint Steering Committee. a Co-
Operative Programme Office will be Established at the Main Contractor’s Facility in Greenville, Texas to Manage Day to Day Maintenance and Support of the Combined Fleet Together with Management of the Through-Life Upgrade Programme. the UK and US will Jointly Man the Co-Operative Programme

Office on the Basis of the Proposed Cost Share. Depth Maintenance will be Based at the Main Contractor’s Facility in Greenville, Texas which Currently Forms the Support Hub for the USA Air Force Fleet of Rivet Joint Aircraft.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development</Td>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td>june 2011</Td>
<td>+14</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation

Airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+14
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>following Approval of the Main Gate Business Case in March 2010 a Capability Management Measure Relating to Planning Round 2010 Stage 3c Was Imposed which Resulted in Delaying the Support Phase of the Project by 14 Months.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+14
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.3. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract End Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development</Td>
<td>march 2025</Td>
<td>march 2025</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation

Airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Support Cost Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Incremen t Title</Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
£m (+ Cost / -
Saving)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.5. Operational Impact of Support / PFI Support Contract Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
85% GREEN
</Td>
<td>
80% GREEN
</Td>
<td>score as of 30 March 2012</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>the Provision of the Rivet Joint Aircraft and Ground-Based Systems that Sustain the UK’s Airborne Signals Intelligence Capability to at Least 2025.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>the Provision of Sufficient Quantities of Competent and Current Aircrew and Ground Operators and Maintainers to Meet Airseeker in-Service Date, Full Operating Capability Timescales and Through-Life Support to at Least 2025.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>planning in Detail the Procurement, Movement and Maintenance all the Support Requirements that will be Affected by the Airseeker Acquisition and Through Life Support for all the Five Elements of Airseeker Systems, which Are: Air Platform, Air Element, Ground Equipment, Training Element (Maintenance Training System, Field Exportable Training System) and Support Element (Forward Maintenance Equipment (Support Equipment, Test Equipment, Tools) and Ground Support Equipment (Power, Cooling, Jacks, Rigs)).</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>the Acquisition, Development and Management of Fixed Permanent Buildings and Structures, Land, Utilities and Facility Management Services in Support of the Airseeker Programme to Meet in-Service Date, Full Operating Capability Timescales and Through-Life Support to at Least 2025.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>the Provision of Sufficient Quantities of Competent and Current Aircrew and Ground Operators and Maintainers to Meet in-Service Date, Full Operating Capability Timescales. the Airseeker Programme is Adequately Resourced to Meet InService Date, Full Operating Capability Timescales and the Continued Throughlife Support to at Least 2025.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>the Development and Endorsement of Rivet Joint Concept of Use and Rivet Joint Concept of Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>maintain 51 Squadron Throughout Comanning. 51 Squadron Has the Ability to Maintain and Operate the Rivet Joint. Airseeker Project Team is Sufficiently Manned to Manage the Introduction of the Rivet Joint System into Service and Manage Associated Through Life Support Activities.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>the Provision of the Rivet Joint System to Have Connectivity to UK Communication Information System for Information Exchange Requirements. System is Security Accredited by UK /
USA Authorities</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2. Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>previous Reported Risk of Maintainer Shortages at Iinitial Operating Ccapability will be Mitigated Through the Temporary Use of Field Service Representatives.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>october 2011</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>sustainment &amp; Follow-on Development MoU Signed and Waiver Received from Joint Supply Chain Authorities to Exempt the Use of Management of Joint Defence Inventory.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>risk of not Achieving Aircraft Release to Service.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Risk that the Initial Operator and Maintainer Training Solution Might not Adequately Meet UK Requirements.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>uk Supply Policy Mandates the Use of Management of Joint Defence Inventory for Airseeker but Support Arrangement with the US Government Precludes Use of this Logistic Information System Approach. UK Joint Support Chain Authorities will Have to be Satisfied that the Alternative Approach Based on the US Air Force System is Acceptable.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>fixed Ground Element at Communications Infrastructure Site may not be Complete in Time for Interim Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1. Airseeker

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>missions Shall be Capable of Being Mounted on a Daily Basis for a Sustained Period (Represented by  Days) from any Combination of the Main Operating Base and Deployed Operating Base with a  Probability of Completion without Mission Failure, Defined as an Attributable Failure that Results in Either a Mission Abort or Loss of the Mission Objective.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kur 2</Th>
<th>logistics</Th>
<th>the Ground Element Shall Complete Follow-on Exploitation of a Mission Within  Hours of the Completion of Each Mission.</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with the Secure Interoperability Necessary to Deliver the Required Military Capability, i.e. Interoperability with all Organisations, Platforms and Systems Necessary to Deliver all Requirements Associated with Assured Information Exchange to the Priority Specified in the Helix Information Exchange Requirements Document</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>the Means Shall be Provided to Fully Train all Those Personnel Involved in the Operation of the System.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>the Means Shall be Provided to Fully Train all Those Personnel Involved in Operational Support of the System.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>the Means Shall be Provided to Fully Train all Those Personnel Involved in the Maintenance of the System.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 7</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>detectable Routine Radio Emissions Upon Selection Shall Provide Electronic Combat Support to the Military Commander.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 8</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>detectable Routine Radar Emissions Upon Selection Shall Provide Electronic Combat Support to the Military Commander.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 9</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>the Ground Element Shall Provide Operational Support.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>previous Reported Risk of Maintainer Shortages at Initial Operating Capability will be Mitigated Through the Temporary Use of Field Service Representatives.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Initial Operator and Maintainer Training Solution Might not Adequately Meet UK Requirements</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.4. Support Contract

## D.4.1. Airseeker Sustainment and Follow on Development

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1&amp;2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>fms Contract Signed</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 1&amp;2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>sfd MoU Signed</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>2 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td> ()</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation
