---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Complex Weapons Pipeline
Page_from: 56.0
Page_to: 80.0
Project_label: Complex Weapons Pipeline
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_56_80.md
---
<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Complex Weapons Pipeline
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Complex Weapons
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Dr Dai Morris FMC-WECA-Head
</Td>
<td>09/05/2013</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
ASRAAM USE Brimstone USE Fire Shadow
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Brimstone 2
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Sea Ceptor Demonstration &amp; Manufacture
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
SPEAR Capability 2 Spiral Development
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
SPEAR Capability 3
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Local Area Air Defence System (Land)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Light)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Team Complex Weapons Initiative is Designed to Meet the UK's Enduring Requirement to Have Battle Winning Military Capability Through the Use of Complex Weapons; to be Assured that the Weapons will Perform as Expected; and to Retain the Ability to Develop Leading Edge Complex Weapons Technologies. Within this Context, the Initiative Aims to Deliver:

1.  Improved, Adaptable and Flexible Complex Weapons (Missiles and Associated Systems) that can be Shaped to Meet Current and Future Military Capability Needs;

2.  Freedom of Action and Operational Advantage in Our Complex Weapons Through a Sustained Indigenous Industrial Construct.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

In April 2008 an Initial Gate Submission Was Made to the Investment Approvals Board for the Complex Weapons Sector. This Was Approved in June 2008. the Business Case Sought Approval to Enter a Noncompetitive Assessment Phase with Team Complex Weapons. the Assessment Phase Was Designed to Test the Viability of UK Sovereign Acquisition of Complex Weapons Through a Modular and Funding Pipeline Approach that Offered Greater Value for Money. This Was Consistent with the Defence Industrial Strategy in Maintaining Operational Sovereignty of UK Complex Weapons and Sustaining UK Industry's Specialist Capabilities.

Initial Work Considered a Number of Options, Ranging from Non-Competitive Procurement Based Around Team Complex Weapons, to Full Open Competition. the Options Were Assessed on their Ability to Meet Military Capability, Operational Sovereignty and Value for Money Measured Against the Draft Concept of Analysis. the Analysis Strongly Indicated that the Continued Use of Competition Would Progressively Erode the MOD's Ability to Secure Affordable and Effective Military Capability and Restrict Future Choice and Decision Making.

## A.3. Project History

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the Team Complex Weapons Proposition is Founded on the Defence Industrial Strategy that Set Out the UK's Intent to Preserve Operational Sovereignty of Its Complex Weapons. the First Step in Assessing the Viability of a UK Sovereign Acquisition Was a Non-Competitive Assessment Phase which Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board (Initial Gate June 2008). This Covered Risk Reduction Work to Develop Solutions to Meet the Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (FASGW), Loitering Munition;
Storm Shadow Capability Enhancement Programme (SSCEP); Future Local Area Air Defence System (FLAADS); and Selected Precision Effects at Range (SPEAR) Programmes. Review Note 1 (March 2009) Sought Approval of a Second Tranche of Money to Continue the Assessment Phase and Review Note 2 (November 2009) Sought Approval for Funds to Conclude the Assessment Phase and to Address the Questions Raised by the Investment Approvals Board (July/October 2009). the Assessment Phase Concluded that the Preferred Option Was a Long Term Partnering Model Based on Bilateral Arrangements with the Team Complex Weapons Prime Contractors. with the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review on the Horizon Interim Main Gate 1 (March 2010) Proposed Entering into a Shorter Term Interim Portfolio Management Agreement (PMA-I) with MBDA UK. It also Sought Approval for Expenditure to Meet Only Immediate Complex Weapons Requirements Specifically:
Loitering Munition (Fire Shadow) (Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture);
SPEAR Capability 2 Block 1 (Demonstration &amp; Manufacture) (Now Brimstone 2);
Future Local Area Air Defence System (Assessment Phase);
SPEAR Capability 2 Block 2 (Now Spiral Development) (Assessment Phase); and SPEAR Capability 3 (Assessment Phase)
Brimstone 2
Pre MPR14</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>significant Technical Issues (E.g. Propellant Cracking and Liner De-Bonding) on the Vulcan Rocket Motor, Manufactured by Roxel, Were Discovered in January 2012. in the Following March a Red Team Review Commenced which Increased Confidence in the Roxel Solution Passing the Testing Environment. to Monitor Roxel's Progress a Series of Risk Gate Reviews Were Established, which Was a Prerequisite Before Seeking Investment Approvals Committee Approval for the Programme. in Order to Mitigate the Risk on Operations in Afghanistan and Other Potential Operations, Resulting from the Delay to the Programme, the Defence Board Approved a Decision Point 2 Option for a Further Buy of Dual Mode Seeker (Non Insensitive Munition) Brimstone Missiles. This Additional Buy Was Jointly Funded by MOD and MBDA UK Ltd. MPR14 the Brimstone 2 Programme Made Significant Progress in Year. Development Trials to Demonstrate Flight Software and Seeker Improvements Successfully Took Place in the United States During SeptemberOctober 2013; the Seeker and Flight Software Development Work is Now Complete. the Trial Was a Key Demonstration of Capability and Achieved Direct Hits on a Variety of Static and Moving Targets. Later in the Year the First Tornado Firing using the Roxel Insensitive Munition Rocket Motor Was Accomplished at Aberporth. Qualification of both Energetic Sub-Systems (Warhead and Rocket Motor) Continue to Progress without any Failures and the Rocket Motor Has Now Passed the Previous Failure Points. This Evidence, along with Substantial Supporting Investigations and Reports, Led to the Satisfactory Closure of the Rocket Motor Recovery Programme that Was Enacted after the Initial Technical Issues in January 2012.
Sea Ceptor (Demonstration and Manufacture)
Pre MPR14 the Main Gate Business Case for FLAADS Maritime Demonstration Phase (Interim Main Gate 2) Was Submitted to the IAC in April 2011 and Was Approved in December 2011. FLAADS Maritime Was Later Officially Named Sea Ceptor and is Referred to as Such Throughout the PSS. Seeker Critical Design Review Was Held on 22 August 2012 with the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory which Demonstrated Seeker Readiness for Air Carriage Trials. a Guided Firing Readiness Review (Significant Milestone) Was Conducted on 27 June 2012 and the Deliverable Was Accepted by the Project Team by 30 September 2012. Critical Design Review Commenced on 19 March 2013 with Performance Aspects Completed in the Second Half of 2013. the MBDA Schedule Risk Analysis Conducted in February 2013 Concluded that the 50% Date for T23 Full Operating Capability in Service Date in 2016 Was Within 3 Weeks of the Approved Baseline. the Project Team Conducted Risk Mitigation and Further Analysis in Order to Close this Variance. MBDA’s Project Schedule Has Been Refined from 2,000 to 8,000 Lines of Detail Since April 2011, as Part of Routine Demonstration Phase Business, Bringing Significantly Greater Granularity to Task Elements. MPR14 the Two Planned Instrument Firings of the Common Anti-Air Modular Missile Were Completed Successfully in April 2013. Approval of the Manufacture Phase and Contract Award with MBDA Were Achieved in September 2013. the Critical Design Review Was Completed in November 2013.
Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)
Pre MPR14 Interim Main Gate 3 Was the Third of the Submissions and Concerned Approval for the Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. the Business Case Was Presented to Equipment Capability Secretariat on 9 January 2012 and Was Considered by the Investment Approvals Committee on 18 January. on 31 January Director General Finance Approved the Case, with a Caveat that Negotiations Should be Concluded with France Before 31 March 2012. Bi-Laterals Continued, but by 28 March when Chief Secretary to the Treasury Wrote to the MOD, Discussions Had not Been Concluded and as Such Chief Secretary to the Treasury Approved the Case, Subject to Receiving French National Approval. Approval from France Was not Immediately Forthcoming and the Project Sought Reapproval.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

MPR14

The FASGW(H)/ANL (Anti Navire Léger (Light Anti Ship)) Concept and Assessment Phase Concluded in December 2011 and Following UK Approval to Proceed to the Demonstration and Manufacture it Was Anticipated that a Contract for FASGW(H) Demonstration and Manufacture Would be Let in Quarter 1 of 2012. However, Owing to a Change of Government in France, a Strategic Defence and Security Review

(Termed “livre Blanc”) Was Initiated Resulting in France Withdrawing Its Immediate Support to

FASGW(H)/ANL Pending the Outcome of the “livre Blanc” Process. Consequently the FASGW(H)/ANL

Demonstration and Manufacture Contract Was not Placed with the Prime Contractor MBDA. the “livre Blanc” Process Concluded in April 2013 and France Confirmed Its Commitment to the FASGW(H)/ANL Project. Following a Period of Intense Negotiations a Contract Was Placed with MBDA for the Joint Programme on 26 March 2014.

Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)

MPR14

The FASGW(L) Demonstration and Manufacture Business Case Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Committee on 15 October 2013. on 23 January 2014 the Case Was Approved by Chief Secretary to the Treasury. Contractual Negotiations are Still Ongoing with Thales.

Future Local Area Air Defence System (Land) Assessment Phase

MPR14

The FLAADS (Land) Initial Gate Business Case Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Committee in October 2013 and Was Approved by the IAC on 21 January 2014. Subsequently an Amendment Was Made to the Through Life Enabling Contract to Include this Tranche of Work with MBDA.

Brimstone Support USE

MPR14

The Business Case for the Continuation of the Brimstone in-Service Support Phase Was Submitted on 17 September 2013 to Head of Defence Portfolio & Approvals Secretariat and Approved on 3 October 2013. a Five Year Contract Was Let in the Same Month. This Included a Short Transition Period with Full Service Delivered from June 2014.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Sea Ceptor

The Two Planned Guided Firings of the Common Anti-Air Modular Missile Were Completed Successfully in

May / June 2014. the Intent to Fit on the First of Class Vessel Was Confirmed by the Chair of the Sea Ceptor Project Board and the Type 23 Platform Duty Holder in June 14. the Design Freeze Review Started in May 14 and Was Concluded in November 14.

FLAADS(Land) Assessment Phase

The Assessment Phase Programme Fed into the Ground Based Air Defence –
Falkland Island Phase 1 Main Gate Business Case, which Was Brought Forward to December 2014. the Remainder of the Assessment Phase will Continue to July 2015 and Inform the Land Ceptor GBAD Phase 1 Demonstration Phase which Has Now Commenced.

Land Ceptor (GBAD Phase 1)

The Main Gate Business Case for FLAADS (Land) Was Brought Forward to Dec 14. the Land Ceptor GBAD Phase 1 Contract Was Placed on 05 January 15;
The Project Has Been Officially Named LAND CEPTOR and is Referred to as Such Throughout the PSS.

Land Ceptor Forms Part of Phase 1 of the Wider Ground Based Air Defence Programme, Led by the Joint

Sensor and Engagement Networks (JSENS) Delivery Team Within the Intelligence Surveillance Target

Acquisition & Reconnaissance Operating Centre. JSENS are Responsible for Delivery of Battlefield

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mission Command, Control, Communication, Computers and Intelligence,  Giraffe Agile Multi-Beam (GAMB) Sensors and all Associated Non-Equipment Defence Lines of Development.. the Short Range Air Defence Project Team, Within the Weapons Operating Centre, is Responsible for the Development and Delivery of the Launcher, Direct Integration with the Giraffe Agile Multi Beam (G-AMB) Radar, the Procurement of the Common Anti-Air Modular Missile Stockpile and the Land Ceptor-Specific Training, Infrastructure and Logistics Requirements. Whilst the SHORAD Project Team Retains Responsibility for Land Ceptor and Its Integration with the GAMB Radar, it is not Responsible for the Availability of G-AMB, nor Leading on the Non-Equipment DLODs;
Accountability Remains Within JSENS. Chief of Material (Joint Enablers) Directed That, Rather than Having Two Project Teams Working to Different Goals, the Single Ownership of the Capability Within Defence Equipment and Support Was Preferred. as JSENS Sits Within Chief of Material (Joint Enablers)’s Area, it Was Decided that JSENS Would Hold Overall Accountability for Phase 1 and Phase 2. the Money for the Land Ceptor Element of Phase 1 Sits Within Weapons, Evaluation &amp; Capability Assurance and Therefore the Through Life Enabling Contract Was Seen as the Most Logical Route for Placing the Work on Contract with MBDA. Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light) a Contract with Thales for FASGW(L) Was Placed on 12 June 2014, Followed by a Contract with Agusta Westland for the Integration of FASGW Onto the Wildcat Helicopter that Was Placed on 13 June 2014. the Preliminary Design Review for FASGW(L) Was Completed by Mar 2015. Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) the Preliminary Design Review for FASGW(H) Was Held in June 2014 the First Product Gate 1 Ballasted Dummy Missile Became Available on 28 February 2015 Brimstone 2 Qualification of both Energetic Sub-Systems (Warhead and Rocket Motor) Completed Successfully in July 2014, Two Months Ahead of Schedule. Certificates of Design Were Issued for Brimstone 2 Missiles and Weapon Systems and Signed by the Maritime &amp; Air Weapon Systems Project Team Leader in November 2014, Two Months Ahead of Schedule. Final ‘operational Evaluation Trial’ Commenced in February 2015 as Planned. While the Majority of Trials Objectives Were Met, Several Warheads Did not Detonate, Requiring Further Work to Ensure that the Issue Does not Recur. Missile Production Was Halted until Identification and Agreement of a Resolution. SPEAR Cap 3 in December 2013 the Surface Attack Project Team Presented a Review Note to the Investment Approvals Committee Seeking Approval for an Increase in the Cost and Time of the Project’s Assessment Phase. in March 2014 Director General Finance Directed that Further Work be Undertaken Before Approval Could be Given. This Work Was Completed and in April 2014 the Required Clarifications Were Provided to Defence Portfolio and Approvals Secretariat. in June 2014 DG Finance Approved Part of the Cost Increase and Requested a Project Update at the Turn of the Year. in February 2015, after a Comprehensive Project Review, the Investment Approvals Committee Approved the Full Cost and Time Increases to the Assessment Phase and Noted that the SPEAR Cap 3 Key User Requirements Had Been Re-Endorsed by Air Command. the Team Complex Weapons Solution, MBDA’s SPEAR Cap 3 Weapon, is the Only Weapon in the Market that Fulfils all the Key User Requirements (the US Small Diameter Bomb 2 (SDB2) Weapon Falls Short on a Number of the Key User Requirements) and There is Clear Operational Analysis that Supports the UK Procurement of SPEAR Cap 3. the Investment Approvals Committee also Approved the Spear Cap 3 Main Gate Being Deferred until 2018 with the Development of the SPEAR Cap 3 Weapon Being Continued Through to 2018 with MBDA via an Assessment Phase Extension, a Business Case for which is Planned for Submission to the Investment Approvals Committee in January 2016. Brimstone Unified Support Environment</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

USE Achieved Full Service Capability in Quarter 3 of 2014. Since then the Unified Support Environment Contract Was Challenged by a Significant Increase in Demand for Dual Mode Brimstone as a Result of Operation SHADER (the British Participation in the Ongoing Military Intervention Against Islamic State in

Iraq). a Significant Increase in Availability of the Existing Stockpile Was Enabled by Joint Working Between MBDA UK Ltd and Defence Equipment and Support as Well as an Uplift in Stock. This Has Continued with Operation SHADER Now Expected to be an Enduring Commitment.

Advanced Short Range Air to Air Missile (ASRAAM) USE

A Business Case Seeking Approval for an in Service Support (ISS) Solution using an Asset Availability Service Was Presented on 11 June 14. on 22 August 2014 Weapons, Evaluation & Capability Assurance Approved the Case and on 29 August the Case Was Approved by Defence Portfolio and Approvals Secretariat. the Contract Was Let the Following Month and Progress Against the USE Contract Has Been Satisfactory. in the Initial Stages of the Contract There Were some Minor Issues with Meeting the Customer Requirements for some Assets at Specific Locations. However the Shortcomings Were Within the Permitted Levels for that Point in the Contract. Note: The Contract Go Live Date in Section C Shows April 14. This is when MBDA Began to Provide the Service. Between April and September the Company Provided the Service at their Own Risk in Advance of the Contract Being Formally Approved.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Interim Main Gate 1

Brimstone 2 - Replaces the Legacy Brimstone Missile's Energetics and Airframe with a New Insensitive Munitions Compliant Warhead, Rocket Motor and an Upgraded Seeker and Airframe. Brimstone 2 will Replace the Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone Capability Currently in Service with the Royal Air Force and will be Integrated Onto Tornado GR4 and is Intended for Integration on Typhoon.

Spear Capability 3 is a New 100kg Class Weapon. This Capability is Planned to be the Primary Air-Toground Armament for the Joint Combat Aircraft/F-35b Joint Strike Fighter from 2022, and Optimised for Internal Carriage. Spear Capability 3 will Provide the Means to Destroy/Defeat a Wide Range of Targets at Range, Including Mobile and Re-Locatable Targets, in all Weathers Day and Night, in Complex Environments under Tight Rules of Engagement.

Sea Ceptor

Sea Ceptor will Provide Increased Capability over Sea Wolf that Addresses the Capability Shortfall Identified in the 2009 Capability Above Water Capability Audits. Sea Ceptor is the Only Candidate to Fill the Capability Gap that is both Affordable and will Meet the Key User Requirements Within the Required Timescales.

Future Local Area Air Defence System (Land) – is Planned to Replace the Rapier Ground Based Air Defence Capability at Its Out-Service-Date at the End of the Decade.

Land Ceptor (GBAD Phase 1)

Land Ceptor will Provide a Replacement to the Rapier Ground Based Air Defence System Towards the End of the Decade and Provide Increased Capability over the Current System to Match the Increased in Threat over the Next 20 Years.

With the Addition of the Ground Based Air Defence Phase 2 Capability, Land Ceptor will Form Part of a Fully Networked Ground Based Air Defence System.

Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) and (Light)

FASGW will Provide the Royal Navy with a Missile Enabling the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft, the Wildcat HMA Mk 2, to Complete Its Full Range of Intended Missions Against Target Sets in the Maritime and Littoral Environments. FASGW(H) will Replace Current Capability Provided by Lynx Mk 8 Helicopters Armed with Sea Skua Missiles and FASGW(L) will Address a Deficit in the Current Anti-Surface Capability. \\\

ASRAAM Unified Support Environment

ASRAAM is Currently Supported by MBDA UK and Other Contractors under a Limited Scope of in Service Support Activities and a Contractor Logistic Support Contract which Expires on 31 March 19. the Inservice Support Solution Meets the Customer’s Requirement and There is Sufficient Stockpile to Maintain the Capability Out to the Current Contract End Date. the Capability Risk is Considered to be Low, but There is a Dependency on Ongoing Life-Extension Programmes Delivering their Expected Outcomes.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date / Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>tornado GR4</Td>
<td>
Brimstone 2 - Missile in Service Date – Nov 15
</Td>
<td>
In Service
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>
SPEAR Cap 3 - Expected Prior to Joint Combat Aircraft Present Assumed Service Entry
</Td>
<td>
Post Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 23</Td>
<td>
FLAADS Maritime – Nov 16
</Td>
<td>
In Service
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>wildcat</Td>
<td>
FASGW(H) and FASGW(L) – Oct 20
</Td>
<td>
Post Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>g-AMB Radar</Td>
<td>
Land Ceptor (GBAD Phase 1) – Mar 19
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Approval
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="3">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Spiral Development</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 3</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Local Area Air Defence System (Land)</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="3">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Fire Shadow
</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Brimstone 2
</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Sea Ceptor Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Land Ceptor GBAD Phase 1
</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)
</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)
</Td>
<td>
Thales
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">the Current Support Approach is Through Individual Contracts for Each Weapon Type, E.g. Storm Shadow, Advanced Short Range Air to Air Missile, Etc. the Intent is to Secure a Long Term Arrangement for Each Project under the Unified Support Environment with MBDA. This Aims to Secure Financial Benefits Across the Programme in the in-Service Support of Weapons Systems. This will be Achieved Through Common Approaches, Methods and Tools, Common Requirements and the Re-Structuring of How Support is Delivered in Industry. Brimstone and the Advanced Short Range Air to Air Missile (ASRAAM) are the First Projects that Have Been Contracted using the Unified Support Environment Approach, with Storm Shadow to Follow in Financial Year 15/16. Additional Systems will be Added at Later Dates.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>unified Support Environment</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>manufacture to in Service</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>complex Weapons Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>239</Td>
<td>236</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 3, SPEAR Capability 2 Block 2 and Sea Ceptor Assessment Phase Elements</Td>
<td>198</Td>
<td>191</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Local Area Air Defence System (Land)</Td>
<td>40</Td>
<td>40</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>477</Td>
<td>467</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name                | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Fire Shadow                               | \-                       | 246                   | \-                        |
| Brimstone 2                               |                          |                       |                           |
| Sea Ceptor Demonstration & Manufacture    | \-                       | 850                   | \-                        |
| Land Ceptor GBAD Phase 1                  | 377                      | 384                   | 392                       |
| Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) | 379                      | 392                   | 460                       |
| Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light) | 293                      | 311                   | 336                       |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">246</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">256</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">+10</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">-1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture</Td>
<td>850</Td>
<td>849</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>land Ceptor GBAD Phase 1</Td>
<td>384</Td>
<td>361</Td>
<td>-23</Td>
<td>-23</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)</Td>
<td>392</Td>
<td>374</Td>
<td>-18</Td>
<td>-17</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)</Td>
<td>311</Td>
<td>311</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>2183</Td>
<td>2151</Td>
<td>-32</Td>
<td>-36</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Fire Shadow & Brimstone 2 (in-Year)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

-1

Budgetary

Factors

A Control Total Transfer in FY14/15 to

Air Warfare Centre for Operational

Evaluation.

Net Variation (£m)

-

1

### B.3.1.1.1 Fire Shadow & Brimstone 2 (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
+10
</Td>
<td>
+10
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 13
</Td>
<td>
+4
</Td>
<td>
+4
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Pre-MPR 13
</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>change in Capability Requirement</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
+11
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.2 Sea Ceptor Demonstration & Manufacture (in-Year) – N/a

### B.3.1.2.1 Sea Ceptor Demonstration & Manufacture (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 12
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.3 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) \[in-Year\]

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

-3

Exchange Rate

The Contract Payment Plan Was

Originally Costed using £1:€1.15.

Actuals in Financial Year 14/15 Have

Averaged £1:€1.30

Mar-15

-11

Accounting

Adjustments

Funds Transferred Out of FASGW(H)

As Work will be Contracted Through

FASGW(L).

Mar-15

-3

Budgetary

Factors

Funding Requirement in Financial Yea

r

/15 Was Lower than Planned.

14

Net Variation (£m)

-

17

### B.3.1.3.1 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) \[historic\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.4 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light) \[in-Year\]

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

+11

Accounting

Adjustments

Increase in Non Prime Costs with

Agusta Westland for FASGW(H)

Work Being Contracted Through the

FASGW(L) Project.

Sep-14

-5

Procurement

Processes

Reduction in Prime Costs Due to

Contract Being Placed using Lower

Labour Rates.

Net Variation (£m)

+6

### B.3.1.4.1 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light) \[historic\]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.5 Land Ceptor GBAD Phase 1 \[in-Year\]

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

-23

Procurement

Processes

This Reduction Reflects the Benefit that

MOD Received from Agreeing that

MBDA Italy Would Undertake an

Element of the Programme, which

Reduced the Design Work that MBDA

UK Had to Complete. a Contract

Amendment to Reflect this Was Put in

Place in Mar

\-

15\.

Net Variation (£m)

-

23

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>brimstone Unified Support Contract</Td>
<td>42</Td>
<td>42</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>asraam Unified Support Contract</Td>
<td>40</Td>
<td>40</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>378</Td>
<td>49</Td>
<td>427</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>556</Td>
<td>248</Td>
<td>804</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>22</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>939</Td>
<td>314</Td>
<td>1253</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>complex Weapons</Td>
<td>
June 2008
</Td>
<td>
April 2010
</Td>
<td>
22
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Local Area Air Defence System (Land)</Td>
<td>
January 2014
</Td>
<td>july 2015 (Forecast)</Td>
<td>
18 (Forecast)
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>july 2012</Td>
<td>
October 2012
</Td>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration &amp; Manufacture</Td>
<td>july 2016</Td>
<td>november 2016</Td>
<td>may 2018</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>land Ceptor (GBAD-Phase 1)</Td>
<td>
September 2018
</Td>
<td>march 2019</Td>
<td>january 2020</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)</Td>
<td>april 2020</Td>
<td>
October 2020
</Td>
<td>october 2022</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)</Td>
<td>april 2020</Td>
<td>
October 2020
</Td>
<td>october 2022</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>
Original Definition: The Project will Deliver 25 Safe and Useful Munitions in March 2012 (50%). These will Form a Start-Up Capability for Current Operations. MPR 2012 Definition: These Definitions are not Applicable yet Given the Incremental Acquisition Approach. in Service Date and Initial Operating Capability Would Likely Occur in Later Increments and be Subject to Definition and Approvals at an Appropriate Time. However, an Initial Batch of Weapons Systems Was Delivered, on Time, in March 2012. These Were Demonstrated in June 2012 and While the Success Rate Was Lower than Desired, Performance of the Hardware Met the Fire Shadow Key Performance Measures. Reason for Change: The Senior Responsible Owner Took a Decision not to Deploy the Weapon for Testing in Afghanistan as the Capability Was not Sufficiently Mature. It Could Therefore not Meet Its in-Service Date for Use in Afghanistan so it Has Been Re-Defined.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>
Initial Operating Capability Provides  Missiles with at Least Air Carriage Hours and Full Release to Service for Deployment on Tornado GR4. This Capability is Forecast to be Available from May 2016, Subject to Further Assessment of the Firing Failures During the March 2015 Trials.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration &amp; Manufacture</Td>
<td>
In Service Date is the Date on which There is Sufficient Evidence Across all Defence Lines of Development to Allow the Front Line Command to Take Control of the System. More Specifically, in Service Date is Achieved with Successful Completion of Acceptance Activities
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
which Includes Completion of the First Type 23 Platform Integration and Trials, Including Firings. for Sea Ceptor D Initial Operating Capability will Coincide with the in Service Date.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>land Ceptor (GBAD-Phase 1)</Td>
<td>
Phase 1 (GBAD-Early Operating Capability) is Defined As: The Delivery of Land Ceptor Suitably Scaled and Prioritised, Including  Launchers (and Associated Support Vehicles);  Common Anti-Air Modular Missile (CAMM) Missiles and Initial Spares Support; Direct Integration of the Giraffe Agile Multi-Beam (G-AMB) Sensor; the Provision of  G-AMB Sensors; Defence Lines of Development Sufficient to Support Phase 1 Deployments.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)</Td>
<td>
In Service Date is Defined as  Trained Crew and  FASGW Modified Wildcat Helicopter Maritime Attack<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref"
Id="Fnref1" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A> Capable of Being Operationally Deployed on-Board Either a Type 23 or Type 45 Warship with Ships Out-Load of FASGW Weapons<a Href="Fn2" Class="Footnote-Ref"
Id="Fnref2" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>2</Sup></A>. Defence Lines of Development, Including Logistic, Engineering and Mission Support Shall be Available to Support a Six Month Deployment.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)</Td>
<td>
In Service Date is Defined as  Trained Crew and  FASGW Modified Wildcat Helicopter Maritime Attack<a Href="Fn3" Class="Footnote-Ref"
Id="Fnref3" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>3</Sup></A> Capable of Being Operationally Deployed on-Board Either a Type 23 or Type 45 Warship with Ships Out-Load of FASGW Weapons<a Href="Fn4" Class="Footnote-Ref"
Id="Fnref4" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>4</Sup></A>. Defence Lines of Development, Including Logistic, Engineering and Mission Support Shall be Available to Support a Six Month Deployment.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">capable of Meeting the Endorsed Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Missions Requiring FASGW, as Detailed in Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Key User Requirement 2.2 Including Offensive Maritime Surface Warfare, Defensive Maritime Surface Warfare and Coastal Suppression.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
<li Id="Fn2">should Excessive Divergence Occur Between FASGW(L) and FASGW(H), and an Opportunity Remains to Deliver Capability from One without the Other, then the Definition of in Service Date will Revert to FASGW(H) Only.<a Href="Fnref2" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
<li Id="Fn3">capable of Meeting the Endorsed Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Missions Requiring FASGW, as Detailed in Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Key User Requirement 2.2 Including Offensive Maritime Surface Warfare, Defensive Maritime Surface Warfare and Coastal Suppression.<a Href="Fnref3" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
<li Id="Fn4">should Excessive Divergence Occur Between FASGW(L) and FASGW(H), and an Opportunity Remains to Deliver Capability from One without the Other, then the Definition of in Service Date will Revert to FASGW(L) Only.<a Href="Fnref4" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>october 2012</Td>
<td>may 2016</Td>
<td>+43</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>
November 2016
</Td>
<td>november 2016</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>land Ceptor (GBAD- Phase 1)</Td>
<td>march 2019</Td>
<td>march 2019</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)</Td>
<td>october 2020</Td>
<td>october 2020</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)</Td>
<td>october 2020</Td>
<td>october 2020</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Fire Shadow – N/a

### C.3.3.2 Brimstone 2 (in-Year)

Date

Variation

(+

/

-

Months)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar 15

+6

Technical

Factors

‘operational Evaluation Trial’

Commenced in February 2015,

But Six of Eight Missiles Failed

To Detonate. the Trial Was

Suspended and an

Investigation into the Cause of

Failures Commenced. Work to

Resolve the Technical Issues

will Add Six Months to the

Programme.

Net Variation

/

(+

-

Months)

+6

### C.3.3.3 Brimstone 2 (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 31%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>
Annual Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 13
</Td>
<td>
+9
</Td>
<td>
+9
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 12
</Td>
<td>
+23
</Td>
<td>
+23
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Pre-MPR
</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+37
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.3 Sea Ceptor Demonstration & Manufacture – N/a

### C.3.3.4 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) – N/a

### C.3.3.5 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light) – N/a

## C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation

Project/Increment

Name

MPR

£m (+ Cost /

-

Saving)

Reason for Expenditure or

Saving

Brimstone 2

MPR 13

14

Technical Factors

Total

+

14

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 76%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>
Delays to Project Initial Operating Capability Have Been Mitigated by Decision Point 2 Option, Providing a Follow-on Buy of Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone Plus Urgent Operational Requirement Standard Missiles.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Progress to Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>
Full Operating Capability Requirement under Revision as Part of Wider Indirect Fire Precision Attack Programme.
</Td>
<td>
The Incremental Approach Has Delivered an End- To- End Capability Demonstration which Was Successful in Yielding Information and Understanding that
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
will be Used to Inform Departmental Planning on the Way Forward- Not Just in Relation to Fire Shadow, but the Whole Indirect Fire Precision Attack Project.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Brimstone 2
</Td>
<td>
Full Operating Capability is Defined As: Full Stockpile on Brimstone 2 Delivered, all Platforms Modified to Utilise Its Full Capability, Sufficient Trained Air and Ground Crews, Full in-Service Support Solution in Place.
</Td>
<td>
Seeker and Flight Software Development Work is Now Complete. Rocket Motor Recovery Programme Complete and Successful First Tornado Firing using the IM Rocket Motor. Qualification of both Energetic Sub-Systems (Warhead and Rocket Motor) Almost Complete. Manufacturing Programme Started. Training Packages in Development and Support Solution Identified.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Sea Ceptor Demonstration &amp; Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
As for Initial Operating Capability but with all Remaining Type 23 Frigates (X12) Fitted and a Full Missile Stockpile ( Total Warshot Incl Initial ) Delivered.
</Td>
<td><ol Type="i">
<li>achievement Of</Li>
</Ol>

Demonstration Phase Contract Award to Deliver First of Class Platform - December 2011.

<ol Start="2" Type="i">
<li>successful Completion of the System Preliminary Design Review -
March 2012.</Li>
<li>successful Completion Of</Li>
</Ol>

Instrumented Firings – April 2013 Iv. Manufacture Phase Contract Awarded for Rest of Class Ship Sets and Initial Common Anti Air Modular Missile Buy –
September 2013 v. Successful Completion of the Critical Design Review –
November 2013 Vi. Successful Completion of Guided Firings – June 2014 Vii. Intent to Fit on First of Class Vessel Confirmed – June 2014

Viii. Successful Completion of the

Design Freeze Review – November 2014
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
GBAD-FI Phase 2
</Td>
<td>
Further Integration of Phase 1 Systems with the Necessary Battlefield Mission Command, Control, Communication, Computers and Intelligence (BMC4I) System; the Delivery of Systems Support to Meet the System Availability Requirement and Ensure the Required Level of Repair and Maintenance is Met; the Delivery of all Other Defence Lines of Development (DLODs), Including Suitably Trained and Experienced Personnel to Operate, Repair and Maintain the System as Required;
Integration with Project GUARDIAN to Produce a Fully Integrated System of Systems.
</Td>
<td>
Land Ceptor Contract Award January 15. Pre Qualification Questionnaire for BMC4I Released to Industry.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)</Th>
<th>fasgw Full Operating Capability Assumes that all the Requirements of Initial Operating Capability Have Been Met and the Capability is Compliant with the Endorsed Threshold User Requirement Document. It is Defined as  Crews and  Aircraft to Generate the Required Number of FASGW Capable Wildcat Force Elements at Readiness to Support the Committed and Responsive Forces. It Requires  Destroyers/Frigates to Have Been Modified and Capable of Delivering Wildcat FASGW Operations with all Appropriate in-Service Royal Fleet Auxiliaries Capable of Resupplying Sufficient Munitions to Meet the FASGW Requirements of the Royal Navy Plan. the Munitions Stockpile is Sufficient to Meet the Agreed FASGW Third Order Assumption Quantities for Destroyers/Frigates and the Main Operating Base Requirements.</Th>
<th>fasgw(H) Demonstration and Manufacture on Contract 26 March 2014. Preliminary Design Review Held in June 2014 First Product Gate 1 Ballasted Dummy Missile Available 28 February 2015.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)</Td>
<td>fasgw Full Operating Capability Assumes that all the Requirements of Initial Operating Capability Have Been Met and the Capability is Compliant with the Endorsed Threshold User Requirement Document. It is Defined as  Crews and  Aircraft to Generate the Required Number of FASGW Capable Wildcat Force Elements at Readiness to Support the Committed and Responsive Forces. It Requires  Destroyers/Frigates to Have Been Modified and Capable of Delivering Wildcat FASGW Operations with all Appropriate in-Service Royal Fleet Auxiliaries Capable of Resupplying Sufficient Munitions to Meet the FASGW Requirements of the Royal Navy Plan. the Munitions Stockpile is Sufficient to Meet the Agreed FASGW(L) Third Order Assumption Quantities for Destroyers/Frigates and the Main Operating Base Requirements.</Td>
<td>fasgw(L) Demonstration and Manufacture on Contract 12 June 2014. Preliminary Design Review for FASGW(L) Completed by March 2015. FASGW Demonstration and Manufacture Contract for Wildcat Integration on Contract 13 June 2014.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract

## C.5.1. Scope of Support / Training / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 76%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>brimstone Unified Support Contract</Td>
<td>
Brimstone Weapon System Support (USE) is a Pathfinder Project to Assess Whether a Common Asset Availability Service is an Appropriate Solution for the Provision and Support Across TCW. the Aim of Brimstone USE, Together with Advanced Short Range Air to Air Missile (USE) &amp;
Storm Shadow (USE) Was to Test the Approach Across Different Weapons, Determine if the Savings Claimed Could Actually be Achieved and if the Service Meets Our Needs.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>asraam Unified Support Contract</Td>
<td>
ASRAAM Was the Second of the Initial Tranche of Equipments to be Supported under the USE Construct. as Part of the Asset Availability Service this Project is Testing the Premise that this Approach to in-Service Support is the Optimum to the Front Line Command and will Provide Savings to the Portfolio.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>brimstone Unified Support Contract</Td>
<td>october 2013</Td>
<td>october 2013</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>asraam Unified Support Contract</Td>
<td>april 2014</Td>
<td>april 2014</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.3. Progress Against Approved End of Support / Training / PFI Contract Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>brimstone Unified Support Contract-1</Td>
<td>
September 2018
</Td>
<td>
September 2018
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>asraam Unified Support Contract</Td>
<td>
March 2019
</Td>
<td>
March 2019
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.4. Other Costs Resulting from Support Cost Variation – N/a

## C.5.5. Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Support Contract Variation – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 55%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project
</Th>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>
65
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor</Td>
<td>
79
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)</Td>
<td>
82
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)</Td>
<td>
89
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

## D.2.1. Fire Shadow – N/a

### D.2.1.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

### D.2.1.2 Defence Lines of Development Variation

### D.2.2.1 Brimstone 2

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Spiral Development of Dual Mode Brimstone. Insensitive Munition Development
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Training Provided for in-Service Users
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
Support Provided for in-Service Use
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Infrastructure Sufficient to Support Stockpile at Readiness.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Principles for Capability Employment
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
No Change to Organisation Required.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Data Handling and Transmission Sufficient.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.2.2 Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>significant Technical Difficulties Experienced with Rocket Motor and Warhead Development are Being Managed to Minimise the Impact on Cost and Time.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.3.1 Sea Ceptor D&M

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Delivery, Installation and Acceptance of First of Class System
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Operator Training Solution Through Maritime Composite Training System and Maintainer Training Through Computer Based Training Solution.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
Industrial in-Service Support Solution in Place
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Defence Munitions Processing Capability in Place.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Principles for Capability Employment
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Organisation in Place to Exploit Capability.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Information Interfaces Defined, Proven and Accredited
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.3.2 Defence Lines of Development Variation – N/a

### D.2.3.1 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">1 Equipment</Td>
<td>
Clearance for the Operation of FASGW(H) on an Embarked Wildcat. One Ship Outload, Role Equipment and Test Sets Available. Ability to Generate FASGW(H) Munitions for Capability Build Up.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">2 Training</Td>
<td>
Aircrew, Maintainers and Ships Personnel Able to Deploy Operationally with FASGW(H) on Board Surface Ships.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">3 Logistics</Td>
<td>
Logistic Support Date Achieved in Service Support Arrangements in Place to Support Deployment of a Ships Flight with Weapons.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">4 Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Main Operating Base Infrastructure to Support Transition Plan. First Ship Cleared to Receive and Operate FASGW(H) Cleared to Store, Process and Deliver FASGW(H) to Front Line.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">5 Personnel</Td>
<td>
Aircrew, Maintainers and Ships Personnel Available to Deploy Operationally with FASGW(H). Support Provision Personnel in Place.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">6 Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Standard Operating Procedures and Tactics Sufficiently Mature to Support Operational Deployment of FASGW(H).
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>organisation</Td>
<td>
Organisation Capable of Operations.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Information Linkages Between Weapon, Aircraft, Ship and Shore in Place to Support Operational Deployment
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (1)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (1)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.3.2 Defence Lines of Development Variation – N/a

### D.2.4.1 Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1 Equipment</Td>
<td>
Clearance for the Operation of FASGW(L) on an Embarked Wildcat. One Ship Outload, Role Equipment and Test Sets Available. Ability to Generate FASGW(L) Munitions for Capability Build Up.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2 Training</Td>
<td>
Aircrew, Maintainers and Ships Personnel Able to Deploy Operationally with FASGW(L) on Board Surface Ships.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3 Logistics</Td>
<td>
Logistic Support Date Achieved in Service Support Arrangements in Place to Support Deployment of a Ships Flight with Weapons.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4 Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Main Operating Base Infrastructure to Support Transition Plan. First Ship Cleared to Receive and Operate FASGW(L) Cleared to Store, Process and Deliver FASGW(L) to Front Line.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5 Personnel</Td>
<td>
Aircrew, Maintainers and Ships Personnel Available to Deploy Operationally with FASGW(L). Support Provision Personnel in Place.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6 Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Standard Operating Procedures and Tactics Sufficiently Mature to Support Operational Deployment of FASGW(L).
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7 Organisation</Td>
<td>
Organisation Capable of Operations.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8 Information</Td>
<td>
Information Linkages Between Weapon, Aircraft, Ship and Shore in Place to Support Operational Deployment
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8(1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8(1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.4.2 Defence Lines of Development Variation – N/a

### D.2.5.1 Land Ceptor (GBAD-Phase 1)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1 Equipment</Td>
<td>
Delivery and Acceptance of  [currently Undefined] Systems.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
2
</Th>
<th>training</Th>
<th>
Delivery of Individual Training Solution on Live Equipment (Collective Training Part of Phase 2).
</Th>
<th>
Yes
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Industrial in-Service Support Solution in Place
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Infrastructure Changes to Thorney Island in Line with Land Ceptor Basing Requirement.
</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
5
</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel (as Part of Phase 2)
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>
Principles for Capability Employment (as Part of Phase 2)
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>organisation</Td>
<td>
Organisation in Place to Exploit Capability. (as Part of Phase 2)
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Information Interfaces Defined, Proven and Accredited (as Part of Phase 2)
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8(1)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

D2.5.2 Defence Lines of Development Variation – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1. Fire Shadow – N/a

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.3.2. Brimstone 2

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur1, UR 1.1</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Capability that is Effective Against the Specified Target Set at the Stipulated Max Range.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur2, UR 1.4</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Weapon that can Achieve a Lethal Effect Against a Wide Variety of Target Types.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur3, UR 1.7</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Complex Scenarios with a High Degree of Confidence that Only the Intended Targets will be Engaged.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur4, UR 1.9</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring Targets.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur5, UR 1.14</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Environments where Collateral Damage Issues Exist
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur7, UR 1.16</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>
The User Requires that Data be Provided to Dstl to Enable the Theatre Command Structure to Complete Collateral Damage Assessment as Part of the Target Clearance Process for Pre-Planned Missions.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur10, UR 1.46</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Capability that Allows an Engagement to be Aborted after Launch.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 11, UR 2.1</Td>
<td>operational and Logistical</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the all-Up-Round to be Compliant with the External Profile, Mass and Centre of Gravity (Including Tolerances) for the Specified in-Service Weapon Warhead
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 12, UR 3.27</Td>
<td>operational and Logistical</Td>
<td>the User Requires that the Warhead be Compatible with the in-Service Components and Equipment Associated with Legacy Weapons as Stated</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur1, UR 1.1. the User Requires a Capability that is Effective Against the Specified Target Set at the Stipulated Max Range.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>batch 5 (Dec 12) &amp; 6 Warhead Proof and Tandem Firings Successfully Completed May 13 to Prove Consistency; Further Tandem Firings are Planned Sept 13 to Provide Additional Evidence. Rocket Motor Design Meets Max Range Requirement but the Design is Still to be Proven Through the Rocket Motor Recovery Programme and Qualification.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur3, UR 1.7. the User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Complex Scenarios with a High Degree of Confidence that Only the Intended Targets will be Engaged.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>analysis of the Seeker Quarry Trial in Feb 13, Conducted to Optimise Dual-Mode Software, is Ongoing and Subsequent Seeker Performance Modelling Was Validated Through the DEV 2 Trial in Sep/Oct 13.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur4, UR 1.9. the User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring Targets.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>analysis of the Seeker Quarry Trial in Feb 13, Conducted to Optimise Dual-Mode Software, is Ongoing and Subsequent Seeker Performance Modelling Was Validated Through the DEV 2 Trial in Sep/Oct 13 but is Subject to Investment Approvals Committee Review Note Approval.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur4, UR 1.9; the User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring Targets.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>analysis of the Seeker Quarry Trial in February 2013, Conducted to Optimise Dual-Mode Software, is on-Going and Subsequent Seeker Performance Modelling Was Validated Through the DEV 2 Trial in Sep/Oct 2013 but is Subject to Investment Approvals Committee Review Note Approval. the Urgent Operational Requirement Weapon Configuration on which Brimstone 2 is Based Was not Formally Assessed under Trials Conditions Due to the Rapid Timescales.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.3.3. Sea Ceptor D&M

### D.3.3.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 1
</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Air Threats Targeting the Host Platform.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 2
</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Air Threats Targeting the Defended Asset.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 3
</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Stand-Off Air Threat.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 4
</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Control the Engagement.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 5
</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Utilise in Environmental Conditions.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 6
</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Integrate to the Host Platform.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 7
</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
The Communication and Information System Interoperability Elements of the Solution to this User Requirement Document Shall be Acquired in Accordance with MOD Communication and Information System Policy.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 8
</Td>
<td>personnel Organisation</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Utilise with Available Manning.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 9
</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Trained to Utilise.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 10
</Td>
<td>logistics Equipment</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Complete Missions without Critical Failure
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.3.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.3.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.3.4. Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)

### D.3.4.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
UR40
</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>the Command Information System Interoperability Elements of the Solution to this User Requirements Document Shall be Acquired in Accordance with MOD Command Information System Policy.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR48
</Td>
<td>equipment Training</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that Allows Deployment in Existing and Planned Magazines on Surface Vessels:</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR50
</Td>
<td>equipment Training Logistics</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with a Capability that Achieves {mission Kill} Against , as Described in Table 9</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR65
</Td>
<td>equipment Training Logistics</Td>
<td>the User Shall Achieve {mission Kill} Against Multiple  Targets with 1 {wildcat} Outload.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>ur7</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with A</Td>
<td>forecast to Be</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>capability that Operates from {wildcat}.</Td>
<td>
Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.4.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.4.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.3.5. Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon (Light)

### D.3.5.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
UR40
</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>
The Command Information System Interoperability Elements of the Solution to this User Requirements Document Shall be Acquired in Accordance with MOD Command Information System Policy.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR48
</Td>
<td>equipment Training</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that Allows Deployment in Existing and Planned Magazines on Surface Vessels:
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR52
</Td>
<td>equipment Training Logistics</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that Achieves {mission Kill} Against Large , as Described in Table 8.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR64
</Td>
<td>equipment Training Logistics</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Achieve {mission Kill} Against Multiple  with 1
{wildcat} Outload.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>ur7</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that Operates from
{wildcat}.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.5.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.5.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.3.6. Land Ceptor (GBAD-Phase 1)

D3.6.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 1
</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Successfully &lt;defeat&gt; Fixed Wing Aircraft</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 2
</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to &lt;defeat&gt; Multiple Raids</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 3
</Td>
<td>equipment Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Conduct Assigned Short Range Air Defence Tasks</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 4
</Td>
<td>equipment Training Doctrine</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to &lt;utilise&gt; the &lt;system&gt; in Specified &lt;environmental Conditions&gt;.</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 5
</Td>
<td>equipment Information

Interoperability
</Td>
<td>the User Shall &lt;operate&gt; Within the Permitted &lt;radio Frequency Spectrum&gt;</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 6
</Td>
<td>equipment Training</Td>
<td>the &lt;user&gt; Shall be [trained] to &lt;utilise&gt;".</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 7
</Td>
<td>equipment Logistics</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Sustain the System Through Life.</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 8
</Td>
<td>equipment Training Logistics</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Complete the &lt;battle Field Mission&gt;
without a &lt;essential Functional Failure&gt;.</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 9
</Td>
<td>equipment Logistics</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Utilise the Standard Supply System</Td>
<td>
Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.6.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

D3.6.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – USE

## D.4.1. Brimstone Weapon System Support - USE

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>logistic Support</Td>
<td>
Brimstone WSS – USE Initial Service Capability - April 14
</Td>
<td>met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>logistic Support</Td>
<td>
Brimstone WSS – USE Full Service Capability – July 14
</Td>
<td>forecast (with Minor Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>1(1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>1(1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.4.2. ASRAAM Weapon System Support - USE

### D.4.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>logistic Support</Td>
<td>
ASRAAM WSS – USE Initial Service Capability – November 2014
</Td>
<td>met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>logistic Support</Td>
<td>
ASRAAM WSS – USE Full Service Capability – February 2015
</Td>
<td>met (with Minor Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>1(1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.4.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a
