---
Year: 2014.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Morpheus
Page_from: 223.0
Page_to: 228.0
Project_label: Morpheus
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2014_223_228.md
---
<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MORPHEUS
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Battlefield Tactical CIS Delivery Team
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Major General Nick Pope
</Td>
<td>16 October 2013</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MORPHEUS Assessment Phase 1
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">initial Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The MORPHEUS Project (Previously Known as the LE TacCIS Successor Sub-Programme) is the Future Capability Element of the Land Environment Tactical Communications and Information Systems (LE TacCIS) Capability Change Programme. It is Planned to Provide Tactical Communication Information Systems for Littoral, Land and Air-Land Force Elements Operating in the Land Environment. It Must Interface with Other Major Projects Such as Falcon and Operational is as Part of the Wider Defence Architecture as Well as Enable Interoperation with Allies’ Systems in a Multinational Context; a Key Focus Being Interoperation with NATO.

MORPHEUS will Replace the Current Portfolio of Tactical Communication Capability, Dominated by Bowman, which Entered Service in 2004 and Currently Have an Out of Service Date of 2026. Whilst MORPHEUS is Undergoing Assessment There is a Requirement to Sustain the Current Capability with a Continuous Need to Address Obsolescence And, where Appropriate and Affordable, Exploit Rapidly Developing Technology. the Current Capability will be Sustained Through First the Legacy Support Project, a Five Year Support Contract which Has Recently Been Let and Secondly, Routine Updates Through the Legacy Systems Update.

An Integral Element of the MORPHEUS Project is the Provision of Communications and Situational Awareness to the Dismounted Close Combat User Where, in this Instance, the Dismounted Situational Awareness Project (Within the LE TacCIS Capability Change Programme) will be an Important Contributory Element.

The Business Drivers for MORPHEUS are to Deal with Critical Obsolescence in Legacy Systems; Make Better Use of Advances in Technology; and Respond to Current Requirements Including Those Drawn from Experience on Recent Operations, by Providing the Next Major Evolution of Systems for Land Environment Tactical Information Superiority, Reaching Beyond the Current Planned Out of Service Date.

The Options Being Assessed Range from Sustaining the Current Systems, to Evolution of These Systems Through to their Wholesale Replacement. Within the LETacCIS Programme, the Legacy Support Project and Legacy Systems Update Projects will Sustain the Current Systems Whilst MORPHEUS will Provide the Capability Beyond Its Out of Service Date, Including Future Support Provision.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Initial Gate Approval, Issued in May 2013, Authorised Part 1 of the Assessment Phase to Assess Acquisition Options (Sustain, Evolve or Replace) and Select Options to be Taken Through to Assessment Phase 2, to then be Designed and Assessed in Detail by a Delivery Partner. Assessment Phase 1 is Required to Submit a Review Note to Recommend Two Options and Appoint a Delivery Partner in July 2016 (50% Confidence). It will also Request Approval for Assessment Phase 2 which will Work to Submit a Main Gate Approval and Select a System Design to Build and Implement.

The Selection of Two Options will be Undertaken Through a Complex Appraisal of Operational Effectiveness and Investment. This will Provide the Two Optimum High Level Designs to be Taken Forward, Together with an Option to Reduce Whole Life Costs by 10%. a Delivery Partner will Mature These Designs to the Appropriate Readiness Levels for a Decision at Main Gate. the Context Within which any New System will Need to Operate will be Complex. Integration Within MOD Wide Information Enterprise, Integration Onto a Diverse Platform Fleet (Including, Inter Alia, Complex Armoured Vehicles, Helicopters and Dismounted Soldiers) and the Future MOD Environment, Future Force 2020, Coupled with Rapidly Developing Technology Could Lead to MORPHEUS Delivering in more than One Increment. Main Gate 1 is Expected to be Submitted in May 2018, and Could be Followed by Review Notes for Approval for Subsequent Increments (Acquisition Option Dependent).

## A.3. in-Year Progress

To Support the Options Analysis a Three Year Appointment Has Been Made with Atkins Ltd to Bring in Expertise in Evaluating Operational Efficiency and Cost of Complex System Design Options. in Addition to This, Industry will be Asked to Produce Prospective Design Options for Each Acquisition Option and Cost Them Through Life. a Competition Has Been Launched for a Company (Acting as a Systems House) to Engage with Broader Industry to Develop Design Options Based Upon Current Market Experience and Future Technology Plans. System Characteristics of the Current Capabilities are Being Documented, and Together with MOD Options for Sustaining the Current Systems, will Form the Baseline for the System House to Commence Design Work on the Future Systems.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Current Tactical CIS Capability is Provided by a Combination of Bowman and Other Systems. It Does not Fully Meet User Needs – Evidenced by the High Number of UORs on Op HERRICK. the Legacy Systems Update Project will Update the Current Capability and will Address some of the Capability Gap. the MORPHEUS Project is Needed To:

-Enable Command Agility

-Enable Information Superiority

-Enable Information Exploitation for Mobile and Static Users from Formation Headquarters to Individual Service Personnel and Platforms

-Link Sensors, Information and Intelligence Providers, Commanders and Effectors in Order that UK Forces Engaged in Combined, Joint, Intergovernmental, Interagency, Multinational Operations Across the Mosaic of Conflict in the Land Environment Remain Inside the Decision/Action Cycle of Its Adversaries.

To Mitigate the Issues Caused by the Rapid Developments in both Civilian and Military Communication Information Systems, MORPHEUS will Need to be Flexible, Adaptable, Easy to Reconfigure and Upgrade – Characteristics that are not Present in Current Systems.

System Level Obsolescence of the Current Capability will Cause Degradation in Information Services in this Decade and a Widening of the Capability Gap.

Benefits Associated with Exploiting Advances in Information Technology will not be Realised.

Efficient Tactical Communication Information Systems is Key in Ensuring Mission Success, Whilst Minimising Casualties. Delays to the MORPHEUS Project will Increase the Operational Risks Inherent in Current Systems.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date / Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>legacy Systems Update</Td>
<td>
IOC 2018
</Td>
<td>
Initial Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>falcon Phase 2</Td>
<td>
IOC 2016
</Td>
<td>
Pre Initial Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>morpheus</Td>
<td>atkins</Td>
<td>assessment Phase 1 –
Operational Analysis</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>
Competitive – UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>in-Service Capabilities are Supported Through the Legacy Support Project by a Number of Providers, for which Current Contracts Expire in March 2019/2020. the Approach for MORPHEUS is to Migrate to a Single Provider Adopting Best Practice and Seek to Exploit the Benefits of a more Open and Modular Solution. This ‘future Support Solution’ will be Developed Through the Assessment Phase Part 2, which will Replace the Legacy Support Project in Apr 2019/2020. This will be Submitted for Approval at the Morpheus Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>morpheus Assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>51</Td>
<td>49</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>morpheus Assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>239</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>51</Td>
<td>288</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| MORPHEUS                   | 2538                     | 2903                  | 3495                      |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost-N/a

## B.4.1. Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Cost Variations-N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
6
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
6
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>forecast Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment

Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 1</Td>
<td>may 2013</Td>
<td>review Note July 2016</Td>
<td>39 Months</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase 2</Td>
<td>
December 2016
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>pase – Future Support Provision</Td>
<td>april 2019</Td>
<td>august 2019</Td>
<td>may 2020</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – N/a

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level – N/a

Assessing a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) to MORPHEUS will not be Possible until the High Level Design Options are Explored in Detail in Assessment Phase 2.

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD) – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM) – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a
