---
Year: 2009.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Investment Decision
Project: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Page_from: 322.0
Page_to: 325.0
Project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2009_322_325.md
---
Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability

Project

Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability

Team Responsible

Afloat Support

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Senior Responsible Officer

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision - Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Provide Afloat Logistic Support to UK and Allied Maritime Task Groups at Sea and their Amphibious Components Operating Ashore. Although not Strictly a One-for-One Replacement Programme, New Vessels will Incrementally Replace Much of the Existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary Flotilla, as Ships Enter and Leave Service Respectively.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability is Designed to Support Three Distinct Types of Maritime Task Group: Carrier Strike, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Security. the Demands of Each Differ Significantly, but are all Composed of Three Common Elements:

Bulk Consumables - Fuel and Potable Water which are Transferred by Hose.

Non-Bulk Consumables - Food, Ammunition and General Stores. Solid Cargo which is Transferred in Unit Loads, Either Ship-Ship or Ship-Shore.

Forward Aviation Support - The Provision of Helicopter Basing and Operating Facilities to Accommodate some of the Task Group’s Aircraft or to Provide Operational Flexibility During a Campaign.

An Early Decision Was Taken to Base the System Solution on Three Classes of Ship:

Fleet Tanker - Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support for all Task Groups. Limited Non-Bulk Consumables Capacity to Support the Small Maritime Security Groups.

Fleet Solid Support Ship - Non-Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support, Optimised for the Carrier Strike Group.

Joint Sea-Based Logistics Ship - Non-Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support, Optimised for the Littoral Manoeuvre Group.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability will be in Service until Around 2047 and as Such the Solution will be Designed to Accommodate the Requirements of Current and Known Future Force Structures, Including, Type 45, the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers, Joint Strike Fighter and Future Surface Combatant.

The Capability to be Provided is Essential to the Evolving Logistic Support Needs of the Royal Navy. the Proposed Procurement Profile of Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Ships Has Been Matched to this Need, the Initial Focus Being on the Double-Hulled Fleet Tankers which are Required in Order to Comply with International Maritime Environmental Standards.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme Received Formal Approval to Enter Its Assessment Phase in July 2005 Based on an Alliance Strategy.

Between March and September 2007, the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Procurement Strategy Was Reviewed to Reflect the Need to Procure the Fleet Tanker Element of the Programme in Order to Comply with International Maritime Legislation. the Alliance Strategy and the Competition to Choose an Integrator Was Terminated in May 2007. in December 2007, Ministerial Approval Was Given for a New Strategy Based on a ‘competitive and Adaptive’ Approach and an Open Competition Was Launched for the Design and Build of Up to Six Fleet Tankers. in Addition to this Approval, Minister Approved the Designation and Delegation of the Heavy Replenishment at Sea Project as a Separate Category D Project. Fleet Solid Support and Joint Sea Based Logistics Ships will Now Form a Separate Strategy to be Considered with Wider UK Industrial Interests.

The Approved Budget for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase is £44m and the Current Forecast for the Assessment Phase, Including Early Design and Requirement Work for Fleet Solid Support and Joint Sea Based Logistics Vessels \\\ (Fleet
\\\, Fleet Solid Support\\\and Joint Sea Based Logistics
\\\.

Due to the Planned Phased Nature of the Project, Support and Oversight for Fleet Tankers and Further Design Work on Subsequent Classes will Take Place after the Fleet Tanker Main Investment Decision, and the Current Total Forecast for this Later Work is \\\ (Fleet Tanker
\\\fleet Solid Support \\\and Joint Sea Based Logistics Vessels \\\bringing the Total Expected Cost of Assessment Work and Later Design for Future Classes to \\\

## A.3. Progress

In May 2008, the Secretary of State for Defence Announced that Four Bidders Had Been Down Selected for the Next Stage of the Competition. They Were Navantia (Spain); Fincantieri (Italy), Hyundai Heavy Industries (Republic of Korea) and a Consortium Led by BVT (UK) with BMT and Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (Republic of Korea). Initial Bids Were Received.

Between May and December 2008 the Department Carried Out an Examination of Its Equipment Programme. as a Result of this Examination the Secretary of State for Defence Announced that There Was Scope for Considering Alternative Approaches for the Military Reach and Sustainability Programme Likely to Involve the Deferral of the Fleet Tanker Element. the Competition Was Formally Closed in March 2009. a Review of the Requirements and Procurement Strategy is Underway.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Deliver Future Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships, Replacing the Current Capability, to Support the Future Royal Navy. Without the Support of These Ships, the Ability of the Royal Navy to Carry Out Global Operations Would be Severely Restricted. Double Hulled Naval Tankers are Required as Soon as is Practicable to Comply with International Maritime Legislation; the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Currently Operates Two Double Hulled Tankers and Six Single Hulled Tankers under Exemption from Legislation. All Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships are Maintained to UK Regulatory and Classifications Standards; Should this Certification be Withdrawn for Single Hulled Tankers, their Operation Would Cease Leading to Operational Limitations. Foreign Nations may Decide to Deny Port Access for Single Hulled Tankers as a Result of an Environmental Incident. Programming for Operations Takes Account of Environmental Restrictions as Well as Limitations on Ships Due to their Material State; some of the Older Ships Being Unable to Operate in Colder Climates Due to their Hulls Being Made of ‘brittle Steel’. These Ships will be Replaced as Part of this Programme.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy – not Applicable

## A.7. Support Strategy – not Applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual / Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of Total

Estimated

Procurement Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total

Estimated

Procurement Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not Applicable

## B.4. Unit Production Cost – not Applicable

## B.5. Performance Against Approved Support Cost – not Applicable

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>july 2005</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>earliest Forecast / Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)</Th>
<th>latest Forecast / Approved</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in Service Date - Not Applicable

## C.4. Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.6. Support / Service / PFI Contract - Not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels – not Applicable

## D.2. Performance Against Lines of Development – not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures – not Applicable
