---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Helix
Page_from: 29.0
Page_to: 31.0
Project_label: Airseeker
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_29_31.md
---
Team Responsible

Helix

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability – Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Capability – Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

Pre-Main Investment Decision - Helix

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Project Helix Seeks to Sustain the UK’s Airborne Electronic Surveillance Capability, Currently Provided by the Nimrod R1 Aircraft and Associated Ground Elements, Against an Evolving and Increasingly Complex Target Set Up to 2025. It will Provide a Rapidly Deployable Capability to Support Operations where it will be Able to Collect, Analyse, Fuse and Disseminate a Coherent and Readily Interpretable Electronic Surveillance Picture in Support of National, Joint and Coalition Operations. This Information will Support Targeting and Combat Identification.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Whilst the Original Concept of the Project Was for the Procurement of a Modern Mission System to Fit into Existing Nimrod R1 Aircraft, in the Run Up to Initial Gate Approval, Other Platforms Were Introduced and Have Been Subject to Detailed Assessment During Development of the Main Gate Business Case. This Assessment also Considered Ground Analysis Facilities, Training Facilities and a Support Solution to the Planned Out of Service Date of 2025.

The Project Received Initial Gate Approval in August 2003. Eight Contractors Were Invited to Participate in a Capability-Based Assessment and Three Were Chosen to Go Forward to a Competitivebased Three-Stage Assessment Phase in April 2004.

The First Stage Required the Contractors to Show their Understanding of the Requirement, and Resulted in a Down-Select to Two Contractors in April 2005.

In the Second Stage the Remaining Two Contractors Were Required to Define the System to Meet the Capability, Proving their Design Through Operational Effectiveness Modelling. This Resulted in a Downselect to a Preferred Contractor in April 2007.

When the Down-Selected Contractor Commenced the Final Stage of the Assessment Phase, a Risk Reduction Exercise, it Became Evident that the Cost of Supporting the Nimrod R1, as the Planned Host Platform, Was Likely to be Significantly Greater than Anticipated.

## A.3. Progress

Due to this Cost Escalation a Change in Strategy Was Made in 2008 to Focus the Remainder of the Assessment Phase on an Investigation of an Alternative to the Nimrod R1 as the Host Platform.

Work Was Undertaken to Obtain a Robust Performance, Time and Cost Envelope and a Main Gate Business Case Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in December 2009 Recommending Procurement of the United States Air Force Rivet Joint System under a Foreign Military Sales Arrangement.

After Defence Board Consideration of the Project’s Cost and Programme Assumptions Within the Context of the Department’s 2010 Financial Planning Round, the Main Gate Business Case Was Updated Through a Review Note and an Addendum. the Updated Business Case Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in March 2010.

Signature of the Foreign Military Sales Letter of Offer and Acceptance Followed that Approval.

As from 1^st^ April 2010 Helix will be Known as Airseeker.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Loss of the Capability to be Provided by Project Helix Would Remove the UK’s Ability to Conduct Theatre-Level Airborne Electronic Surveillance in the Future. UK Forces Would be Denied the Ability to Acquire Timely Intelligence from Increasingly Complex and Rapidly Changing Electronic Sources in the Theatre Domain. This Would Significantly Reduce the Ability to Acquire, Process and Disseminate Signals, Communications and Electronic Intelligence to UK and Coalition Partners. Critically, the Principal Source of Tactical Data Essential to the Nature of Current Operations Would be Lost, Substantially Reducing the Ability to Conduct Effective Targeting and Information Operations.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="5">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>description</Td>
<td Colspan="4">
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Helix
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="4">
Competitive Assessment Phase - Expanded to Consider Other Options.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="5">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not Applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>helix</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>38</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>38</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>helix</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – not Applicable

## B.4. Unit Production Cost – not Applicable

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March
</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to 31

March 2010</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
2009
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>
37
</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
<td>
38
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure (£m)</Td>
<td>37</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
<td>
38
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>helix</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
August 2003
</Td>
<td>79</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>earliest

Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>helix</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – not Applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures – not Applicable

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development – not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures – not Applicable
