---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers
  Programme
Page_from: 402.0
Page_to: 408.0
Project_label: United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate  and Destroyers
  Programme
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_402_408.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project Title</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers Programme</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>team Responsible</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>joint Sensor and Engagement Networks</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>senior Responsible Owner Date Appointed</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>commodore Simon Kings (Above Water Capability) 14th February 2011</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name Current Status of Projects
/</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers Programme Pre-Main Investment Decision </Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Cooperative Engagement Capability is a United States Naval System Fitted to an Increasing Number of United States Assets Including Ships, Aircraft, and Army and Marine Corps Land Systems.

Cooperative Engagement Capability Does not Replace any Single System;
Rather it Optimises War-Fighting Capabilities Inherent in Existing and Future Combat Systems.

UK Cooperative Engagement Capability is a Network Enabled Capability Project which Provides an Advanced Air and Missile Defence Capability by Sharing and Fusing Engagement Quality Data from Suitably Equipped Platforms to Deliver a Single, Coherent, Stable Air Picture. It will Fill the Capability Gap Originally Identified in Commander in Chief Fleet’s Military Capability Reports and Re-Affirmed in the Defence Equipment Capability (Above Water Effects) Capability Audit in 2007, to Detect, Monitor, and Counter Air Warfare Threats. It will also Reduce a Gap in Interoperability with the United States.

UK Cooperative Engagement Capability Enhances the Ability of Fitted Platforms to Work Together in Detection, Tracking and Engagement of Air Targets. This Capability Represents a Major Advance in both Air and Missile Defence.

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

The Objective of the Assessment Phase is to Establish the Most Cost Effective Solution to the Requirement for a Cooperative Engagement Capability System Capability for Type 23 Frigates and Type 45 Destroyers. Cooperative Engagement Capability is a Proven United States Developed Programme which the UK is Considering Purchasing via the Foreign Military Sales Process. the UK, with United States Assistance, is Developing and Testing the Platform Architecture and Support and Integration Aspects, to Reduce Risk Prior to Main Gate. a Planning Round 2011 Option Was Taken to Delete Type 23 and Meet the in-Build Phase of Type 26 Global Combat Ship.

Assessment Phase 1. Approval for UK Cooperative Engagement Capability Assessment Phase 1 Was Received in May 2000 And, Following a Competition, Contracts Were Placed with Lockheed Martin UK

Integrated Systems and Raytheon UK, with Down-Selection to Lockheed Martin for Assessment Phase 2. This Was for the Type 23 Only. Also During this Phase a Study Contract Was Undertaken by BAE Systems to Investigate Cooperative Engagement Capability Fit on the Type 45.

Assessment Phase 2. in May 2003 Approval Was Received to Accelerate the Risk Reduction Work on Type 45 by Two Years, at No Additional Procurement Cost. in July 2003, this Work Was Placed on Contract by Means of an Amendment to the Type 45 Prime Contract with BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd, the Prime Contracting Office for the Type 45. Costed Proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase for both Type 23 and Type 45 Were Delivered by Lockheed Martin and BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd Respectively in 2005. However, an Option Was Taken as Part of the Equipment Plan 2005 Planning Round Extending the Assessment Phase by Five Years, Enabling Further De-Risking of the Project.

Assessment Phase 2b. De-Risking Study Contracts Were Placed with Lockheed Martin and BAE Systems Surface Ships Ltd to Investigate the Options for Integrating Cooperative Engagement Capability into the Two Platforms and their Existing/Planned Systems and to Produce Recommendations for Design Solutions. This Work Was Successfully Completed in March 2008.

Assessment Phase 3. a Review Note Signed in September 2008 Approved the Remaining Assessment Phase Work. This Covers Detailed Design and Delivery of the Assessment Phase 2b Study Recommendations for Cooperative Engagement Capability System Installation and Interface on both Type

23 and Type 45 Platforms. Planning Round 2011 Option to Delete Type 23 and Fit on Type 26 Resulted in

UK Cooperative Engagement Capability Being Included as Part of the Design Baseline. a Current

Planning Round 2012 Option to Delete the Programme Resulted in Further Delays to Main Gate

^enter\ Text\ Here^submission, However, the Project Team Continued to Assess a Number of Bids from Industry in Preparation for Main Gate. Further Operational Analysis, a Review of Technology Assumptions Since the Initial Gate Approval in 2000, and a Revised Investment Appraisal Were Commissioned.

## A.3. in-Year Progress

Continuation and Resultant Completion of Assessment Phase Work with BAE Systems Surface Ships

Limited. All Assessment Phase Deliverables Have Been Received and Accepted by Defence Equipment &support. Three Bids Have Been Received from Industry to Support Main Gate Submission. the Bids are from BAE Systems Surface Ships Limited, MBDA and Mission Systems. Parallel Pricing Work Has Been Tasked to Cost Analysis & Assurance Services with Four Engineering Tasks Placed Including an Independent Cost Estimate for Software Pricing. Evaluation of the Bids are Being Carried Out by the

Delivery Team in Anticipation of Favourable Planning Round 12 Outcome to Proceed to Main Gate in

Financial Year 12/13. the Procurement Strategy Has Been Fully Endorsed by Intelligent Surveillance Targeting Acquisition & Reconaissance Commercial Head. Delays in Announcing Planning Round 12 Resulted in a Main Gate Forecast of September 2012.

Planning Round 2012 Has Announced United Kingdom Cooperative Engagement Capability Project Delete Option E12AW006S Has Been Taken and is not Part of the Funded Core Programme. Delete Option also Identified £1m to Conduct Project Close Down Activities in Financial Year12/13.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Cooperative Engagement Capability is a Force Multiplier which Provides an Advanced Air and Missile Defence Capability by Sharing and Fusing Engagement Quality Data from Existing Sensors on Suitably Equipped Platforms to Deliver a Single, Coherent, Stable Air Picture. UK Cooperative Engagement Capability will be Fitted to 14 Platforms (Six x Type 45 Destroyers and Eight x Type 26 Global Combat

Ship) and will be Fully Interoperable with the United States, Forming a Seamless Cooperative Engagement

Capability Network. Cooperative Engagement Capabilty is a Long Standing Programme with United

Kingdom to United States Navy Board International Obligations. United Kingdom Acquisition of

Cooperative Engagement Capability is Enabled Through the United States/United Kingdom Cooperative Engagement Capability Memorandum of Understanding and Foreign Military Sales Cases, and is Essential for Future Coalition Interoperability. UK Co-Operative Engagment Capability Partly Mitigates the Decision to Reduce the Number of Type 45 Hulls to Six. UK Cooperative Engagement Capability Fit to Type 45 is a Recognised De-Risking Measure to the Type 45 Programme and the Above Water Effects Capability Audit 2011 Dated 13 September 2011.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Title of Associated

Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 45 Destroyers</Td>
<td>july 2010</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>december 2021</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project /
Increment Title</Td>
<td Colspan="3">procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Cooperative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers Programme</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Cooperative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers Programme</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Planned Support Strategy Forms Part of the Procurement Strategy which will be Endorsed at the Main Investment Decision. This Support Strategy Assumes Two Main Elements: The United States Core Cooperative Engagement Capability to be Supported via a Foreign Military Sales Case;
The UK Element to be Supported by a Contractor Logistic Support Contract with United Kingdom Industry. a Key Element will be Achieving Value for Money by using the Existing United States Spares, Support and Training Structures Wherever Practical as Articulated in the Procurement Strategy Analysis of Support Options.

Enter Text Here</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>53</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>53</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>53</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>53</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers Programme</Td>
<td>25</Td>
<td>53</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>25</Td>
<td>53</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Forecast (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Co-Operative</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers Programme</Td>
<td>may 2000</Td>
<td>
September 2012
</Td>
<td>148</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>united Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigates and Destroyers Programme</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicab

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>
1-10
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable
