---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Post-main-gate projects
project: Joint Combat Aircraft
page_from: 102.0
page_to: 117.0
project_label: Joint Combat Aircraft (Lightning II)
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2011_102_117.md
---
| Project Title                               |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Joint Combat Aircraft                           |                                             |
|                                                 |                                             |
| Team Responsible                            |                                             |
| Joint Combat Aircraft Team                      |                                             |
|                                                 |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner                    |                                             |
| Head of Capability (Deep Target Attack)         |                                             |
|                                                 |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name                      | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| System Development & Demonstration              | Post-Main Investment Decision               |
| Production, Sustainment & Follow-on-Development | Post-Main Investment Decision               |
|                                                 |                                             |

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

1.  The Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Following the 1998 Strategic Defence Review, UK participation in the Concept Demonstration Phase of the programme and significant analysis, the US Joint Strike Fighter was selected to meet the Joint Combat Aircraft requirement for Carrier Strike. A tailored Main Gate demonstration approval was obtained in January 2001 for participation in the System Development and Demonstration phase to the value of £1,300m, along with £600m for related non-System Development and Demonstration work, leading to signature that month by UK and United State's governments of the System Development and Demonstration Memorandum of Understanding. The selection of Lockheed Martin as the Joint Strike Fighter air system prime contractor included a teaming agreement with Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems to collectively form Team Joint Strike Fighter. Two separate and competitive propulsion contracts were awarded to Pratt and Whitney for the F135 engine and General Electric/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team for the F136 engine. Whilst other partners joined the programme at Level 2 and 3 entry arrangements, only United State's and UK requirements have driven the System Development and Demonstration baseline solution. In September 2002 the UK selected the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Joint Strike Fighter variant to meet the requirement. A review of the Joint Strike Fighter program and the viability of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design was completed in January 2005. It concluded that a successful programme of weight reduction initiatives and other performance enhancements had restored confidence that the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design should remain the UK’s planning assumption. A further review by the Investment Approvals Board in July 2006 confirmed this decision. On 12 December 2006 Minister of State for Defence Equipment and Support signed the Production Sustainment and Follow-on Development Memorandum of Understanding , which was the first of four Main Gates planned for the introduction to Service of Joint Combat Aircraft. In March 2009, approval was given for Phase 2 of the Joint Combat Aircraft incremental strategy, for participation in joint Initial Operational Test &amp; Evaluation with the United States Services. This will allow the UK to fully understand and influence the Joint Strike Fighter programme as it moves into a new phase. A formal In-Service Date for Joint Combat Aircraft requirement will not be set until the Main Gate 4 decision point. However, the Department is planning to deliver a capability from both land and sea that is consistent with Her Majesty's Government policy to introduce a Carrier Strike capability around 2020.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  The Assessment Phase

Approval was obtained in November 1996 to enter the Concept Demonstration Phase on the Joint Strike

Fighter programme under a Memorandum of Understanding signed in December 1995. The phase began in November 1996 with two competing United States Prime Contractors (Boeing and Lockheed Martin) designing and flying demonstration aircraft on which the selection of the preferred bidder was based. A tailored Main Gate demonstration approval was obtained in January 2001 for participation in the System Development and Demonstration phase. The phase completed in October 2001 with the announcement of Lockheed Martin as the successful bidder. Studies into alternative options to Joint Strike Fighter to meet the requirement were also conducted but were rejected on cost effective grounds. The options were US F/A18E aircraft, French Rafale M, a “navalised” Eurofighter Typhoon and an advanced Harrier.

1.  Progress

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>The 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review confirmed the requirement for the Joint Strike Fighter as part of the future fast jet fleet. The MOD now plan to buy the Carrier Variant of Joint Strike Fighter, which offers advantages in terms of range, payload and through-life costs over the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing variant. It also offers greater interoperability with the UK's allies. Although the MOD has decided to acquire the Carrier Variant it remains supportive of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing programme and is still committed to the purchase of this variant of aircraft as part of the UK's contribution to a joint Initial Operational Test and Evaluation programme that is being conducted in conjunction with the US military. On the 6th January 2011 US Defense Secretary Gates announced the conclusion of the Technical Baseline Review of the Joint Strike Fighter programme. The announcement stated that:
<ol type="a">
<li>The Joint Strike Fighter System Development and Demonstration phase will be extended to complete in early 2016 (vice mid 2015).</li>
<li>System Development &amp; Demonstration costs will be increased by
$4.6bn to cover the time delay, cost escalation and the additional test effort required by the Technical Baseline Review.</li>
<li>A reduction in US production requirements of 124 aircraft over the remaining five Low Rate Production Contracts, initially with zero growth to allow the final assembly process at Lockheed Martin to mature and also to reduce the concurrency risk whilst the development programme matures.</li>
<li>The Short Take Off and Vertical Landing variant is being put "on probation" for two years. This involves decoupling of development testing, which has been problematic, from the main Joint Strike Fighter programme where Carrier Variant and Conventional Take Off and Landing variants are progressing at a faster rate. Whilst "on probation" Short Take Off and Vertical Landing production rates will be capped at six per year.</li>
</ol>
It should be noted that whilst the overall cost of the System Development Demonstration phase of the Joint Strike Fighter programme has been increased, the UK's contribution will not change and is fixed by the Memorandum of Understanding the MOD jointly signed with the US in 2001. Increases in the forecast against current approvals reflect additional studies that now need to be conducted to fully understand the wider capabilities of the Carrier Variant and to ensure coherence with the UK's specific operational sovereignty, safety and airworthiness requirements. As a result of the switch to the procurement of the Carrier Variant the Key Performance Measures reported against Short Take Off and Vertical Landing as "at risk" in MPR2010 (Key Performance Measures 03 Range and Key Performance Measures 04 Mission Performance) are now reported as "forecast to be met".</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Capability Risks

This capability provides the UK with a fifth generation expeditionary air to ground, air to air and Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition And Reconnaissance capability to satisfy the 1998 Strategic Defence Review requirement for a carrier-capable Joint Combat Aircraft. Without this capability the UK will be unable to meet its Combat Air and Carrier Strike requirements and be unable to support ground forces in multi-threat environments at a time and place of the Government’s choosing.

1.  Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 57%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Title of Associated Project</th>
<th>
Forecast In Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability
</th>
<th>
Approval Status
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Queen Elizabeth Class (Future Aircraft Carrier)</td>
<td>
1 2018 and 2020
</td>
<td>
Post Main Gate
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th colspan="4">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>Contract Type</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Development &amp;
Demonstration</td>
<td>Lockheed Martin</td>
<td>System

Development and

Demonstration</td>
<td>Cost plus award fee, subject to a maximum price</td>
<td>Competitive International collaboration procurement. UK participation through Memorandum of Understanding agreement. (Note: the contract is placed by the US Department of Defense with Lockheed Martin.)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production, Sustainment &amp;
Follow-onDevelopment</td>
<td>Lockheed Martin</td>
<td>
Initial Operational

Test &amp; Evaluation Aircraft</td>
<td>Cost plus award fee, subject to a maximum price.</td>
<td>Competitive International collaboration procurement. UK participation through Memorandum of Understanding agreement. (Note: the contract is placed by the US Department of Defense with Lockheed Martin.)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Support Strategy

1 The Forecast Initial Operating Capability Dates are those following the Carrier's conversion to the Carrier Variant configuration.

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/
Increment Title</td>
<td>
Approved Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>
proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
<td>
Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure (%)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>150</td>
<td>144</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>7.1%</td>
<td>6.8%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>150</td>
<td>144</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>7%</td>
<td>7%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest Forecast /

Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Development &amp;
Demonstration</td>
<td></td>
<td>1874</td>
<td>2060</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production, Sustainment &amp;
Follow-on-Development</td>
<td></td>
<td>608</td>
<td>608</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Budgeted For

Cost (£m)</th>
<th>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>In-Year Variation (£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>System Development &amp;
Demonstration</td>
<td>1874</td>
<td>1585</td>
<td>-289</td>
<td>+42</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production, Sustainment &amp;
Follow-on-Development</td>
<td>608</td>
<td>527</td>
<td>-81</td>
<td>-79</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>2482</td>
<td>2112</td>
<td>-370</td>
<td>-37</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost Variation against approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

1.  System Development & Demonstration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>
Category
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2011
</td>
<td>
+13
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Reassessment of risk mitigation activities in relation to Reprogramming (+£5m) and Ship/Air Integration (£8m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2011
</td>
<td>
+8
</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Removal of IRDEL (Foreign Exchange) as per revised Departmental policy.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2011
</td>
<td>
-7
</td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</td>
<td>MPR2011 In year 2010/11 Exchange Rate variance (-£3m). Exchange rate variance 2011/12 to 2013/14 (-£4m).</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
January 2011
</th>
<th>+59</th>
<th>Technical Factors</th>
<th>Creation and ongoing funding of an Engineering Authority (£9m).
£50m due to the Joint Strike Fighter's Technical Baseline Review impact on: a) the System Development and Demonstration now completing in 2015/16 (+£58m), b) In-year delays and revised short-term plans (-£8m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
October 2010
</td>
<td>-31</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>Deletion of the Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing Key User Requirement due to the Strategic Defence and Security Review decision to change aircraft variant.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-16</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Removal of Cost of Capital due to Clear Line of Sight policy implemented by HM Treasury.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+37</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>MPR2010 In year 2009/10 Exchange Rate variance (+£12m). Exchange rate variance 2010/11 to 2013/14 (+£25m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-21</td>
<td>Budgetary Factors</td>
<td>Cost reductions and re-profiling of UK National requirements (£15m), correction of effect of System Development &amp;
Demonstration Contribution nonfinancial contributions (+£1m), revision of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation contribution (-£2m), reduced forecast for Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing risk mitigation (-£5m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-100</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>MPR2009 In year 2008/09 Exchange rate variance (+£4m). Exchange rate variance 2009/10 to 2013/14 (+£2m). MPR08: System Development and Demonstration contribution against MPR07 Versus MPR08 Exchange rate: 2007/08 (-£12m), 2008/09 to 13/14 (-£6m). MPR07:
Exchange rate against profile until 2013 (-£11m). Change in dollar/pound exchange rate (MPR06 +£9m; MPR05 -£181m; MPR04 -£85m;
MPR03 -£9m; MPR02 +£189m).</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Historic</th>
<th>-25</th>
<th>Budgetary Factors</th>
<th>MPR09: In year out turn against forecast – Risk mitigation action leading to minimal level of unforeseen activities emerging (£10m), Ship Borne Rolling Vertical Landing (-£8m) due to overestimate of the work required at this stage of the programme, slippage in the integration of JCA with the Future Aircraft Carriers (-
£6m) due to slower than anticipated progress, correction of in year System Development &amp; Demonstration Contribution (+£2m). Re-profiling of future years -comprising of Ship Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing –
reassessment of the funding required to return the aircraft with a higher payload (-£1m), updated assessment of the expected implementation work supporting the Autonomic Logistics Information System – a global system for all maintenance and spares for Joint Strike Fighter (£2m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-5</td>
<td>Budgetary Factors</td>
<td>An increase due to Joint Safe Escape – the ability to deploy weapons safely (+£1m) which was not previously explicitly forecast, refinement of Risk mitigation funding for future years (-£4m), Reduction of Safety Case – a requirement to ensure the aircraft is fit to fly (-£2m) due to the cost to the UK being reduced by the contribution of partner nations.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Historic
</th>
<th>
-1
</th>
<th>
Budgetary Factors
</th>
<th>MPR08: In year out turn against forecast – including minor changes for 2007/08 (-£14m). UK non System Development and Demonstration National work;
Changes to reflect realism: UK Precision Guided Bomb (-£7m), Carrier Variant Future integration (+£1m) and Operational Test and Evaluation (-£7m). Maturation of risk identified since Equipment Plan 07: Autonomic Logistic Information System (+£5m), Conformity European markings (+£6m), Re-assessment of risk (+£6m). Re-assessment of Main programme expenditure: Mission Support (+£2m), Reprogramming (+£10m), Bowman (+£4m). Planning Round 08 Option not included in Equipment Plan07 (£7m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+279
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>MPR07: Re-assessment of UK National Work - attributable cost which include: UK integration costs: (-£94m), Block 3 weapons adjusted to reflect the latest costing from Prime contractor (+£7m), Safety Case now defined to prepare for contract placement in 2007/08 (+£11m) and reassessment of risk provision (£87m). Break out from reassessment from risk provision above which are: UK basing integration &amp; testing (+£5m), Identification of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation costs (+£26m). Outturn for 2006/07 versus Forecast (-£6m). Adjustment for realism in the cost of the UK non-
System Development and Demonstration work resulting from a deeper review of the estimates originally provided by the US (+£43m).Costs benefits gained from use of existing Advance Short Range Air to Air Missile stocks for Joint Combat Aircraft trials (-£6m). Fewer weapon studies undertaken in year (-£1m). Improved project support strategy (-£3m). Better understanding of the integrated nature and requirements of the aircraft systems (+£384m).</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Historic</th>
<th>-34</th>
<th>Budgetary Factors</th>
<th>MPR06: Re-profile of UK National Work to mitigate increase in Exchange Rate. Main Drivers are Interoperability (-£1m), Capital Studies (-£1m), UK Integrated Helmet Mounted Display System (
£1m) and Carrier Vessel Future Integration (-£3m). Re-profile of later years Follow on Development (-£3m).MPR05: Reassessment of Dstl &amp; QinetiQ tasking (-£10m). Correction of contingency estimates due to weight risks in MPR04 (-£15m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-13</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>MPR07: The Integrated Project Team conducted a review of the project work schedule which has given the team sufficient certainty to include more accurate accruals for the duration of the project (£10m). Accounting Adjustment made in MPR06 now reflected in re-profiling of programme (-£2m). New Defence Procurement Agency requirement to include Price Forecasting Group costs within the equipment plan (+£1m). Accounting reclassification of feasibility studies (-£2m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+5</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>MPR06: Change of accounting treatment for System Development and Demonstration contributions. (+£19m) re-profile of 2005/06 accrual into later years. (-£18m) removal of 2005/06 accrual. Reconciliation of accrual (+£1m). MPR05: Re profiling of UK specific tasks (+£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-71</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>MPR06: Reviews of the external missile systems for Joint Combat Aircraft resulted in the removal of the requirement for integrating internally mounted Brimstone (£41m), Paveway II and III (-£1m) capabilities and some internal configurations of the Advanced Short Range Air-to-Air Missile (£49m). Further UK participation in the Joint Integrated Test Force to reflect UK acceptance into service strategy (+£20m).</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\-

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Historic</th>
<th>-472</th>
<th>Changed Capability Requirements</th>
<th>MPR05: Provision for Alternate Helmet Mounted Display System removed (-£40m). Reassessment of 2004/05 forecast expenditure (-£12m). Review of miscellaneous requirement including Exchange of Letters Risk Provision (-£40m), design of UK Specific Support (£3m), Environmental Protection (£3m) and Autonomic Logistic Information System interoperability (-£6m). Block IV weapons as a result of JSF programme re-alignment (£368m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+55</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>MPR07: Re-alignment of programme now included in Development -
Ship-Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing (+£55m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-29</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>MPR05: Reduction of Risk line as a result of programme delays (£29m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-7</td>
<td>Budgetary Factors</td>
<td>Fewer UK studies than originally planned (MPR02 -£1m; MPR03 (£6m)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+87</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>MPR 04: Re-examination of risk within the overall programme. (+£87m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation (£m)</td>
<td>-289</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Production, Sustainment & Follow-on-Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>
Category
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
April 2011
</td>
<td>
-40
</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>No operational conversion unit is now required in the early years and as such support costs in the early years of flying aircraft have been reduced.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2011
</td>
<td>
-28
</td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</td>
<td>MPR2011: Exchange Rate variation (-£28m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2011
</td>
<td>
-11
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>Improved estimate of production expenditure (-£12m). Delays in Long Lead expenditure (+£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+31
</td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</td>
<td>MPR2010: Exchange Rate variation (+£31m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>Correction of Composite Share Ratio (UK contribution to shared partner costs) from MPR09 (£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-30
</td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</td>
<td>Improved understanding of production cost data related specifically to Operational Test &amp; Evaluation aircraft (-£30m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation (£m)</td>
<td>
-81
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Unit production cost/Quantities required

2.  Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

3.  Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010 (£m)
</th>
<th>In-year expenditure

(£m)
</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011 (£m)
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>
144
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td>
144
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>
1343
</td>
<td>
240
</td>
<td>
1583
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>
1487
</td>
<td>
240
</td>
<td>
1727
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
-2
</td>
<td>January 2001</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

3

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

2.  In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

1.  Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 59%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>Initial Operating Capability - 6 embarked aircraft at Readiness Level 2 (2-5 days notice to move) – to align with the US acquisition framework and definitions.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Progress against approved Dates

2.  Timescale variation

3.  Other costs / savings resulting from Timescale variation

4.  Operational Impact of In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability variation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Full Operating Capability

1.  Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Full Operating Capability</th>
<th>Progress to date</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>Yet to be defined.</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Support / Service / PFI Contract

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Rather than passing an Initial Gate, Joint Combat Aircraft has used a tailored Main-Gate Strategy.

2.  The In-Service Date approval will be sought as part of the incremental Production Approval strategy.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  <u>Section D: Performance</u>

## D.1. Maturity Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 60%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Sentinel Score</th>
<th>
81 GREEN
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

\ Applies to the previous version of the aircraft (Short Take Off Vertical Landing) and has yet to updated for the revised aircraft (Carrier Variant)

1.  Performance against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Line of Development</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be met (with risks)
</th>
<th>Not met /
Forecast not to be met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</td>
<td>Initial 10 Force Elements @ Readiness</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</td>
<td>Sufficient trained and available personnel</td>
<td>Yes (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</td>
<td>Successful integration of Joint Strike Fighter support solution into UK and Joint Supply Chain</td>
<td>Yes (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</td>
<td>Completion of Main Operating Base</td>
<td>Yes (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</td>
<td>Sufficient suitable personnel available for training and support</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</td>
<td>Doctrine in place</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</td>
<td>Suitable command structures in place to support US based Initial Operational Test and Evaluation and Operational Conversion Unit, as well as UK Main Operating Base, Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and Forward Operating Base operations.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</td>
<td>Integration of Joint Combat Aircraft into UK Ground Information Infrastructure.</td>
<td>Yes (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Current forecast (with risks)</td>
<td>8 (4)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Last year’s forecast (with risks)</td>
<td>8 (2)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</th>
<th>Category</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>Training</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>Reliance on US Navy training system for initial throughput and training of early instructor pilots and squadron pilots.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>Infrastructure</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>Delays to formal announcement of Joint Combat Aircraft Main Operating Base places time pressure on infrastructure provision.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>Logistics</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>Insufficient Maritime Intra-Theatre Lift to support Joint Combat Aircraft aboard Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers .</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
Information
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>UK Ground Information Infrastructure may be unable to support the requirements of Joint Combat Aircraft Information Systems</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Performance against Key Performance Measures

1.  Joint Combat Aircraft

1.  Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be met (with risks)
</th>
<th>Not met /
Forecast not to be met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</td>
<td></td>
<td>Survivability</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2</td>
<td></td>
<td>Interoperability</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3</td>
<td></td>
<td>Combat Radius</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4</td>
<td></td>
<td>CV Recovery</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td></td>
<td>Mission Reliability</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6</td>
<td></td>
<td>Logistic Footprint</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>7</td>
<td></td>
<td>Sortie Generation</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Current forecast (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7 (0)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Last year’s forecast (with risks)</td>
<td></td>
<td>7 (2)</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</th>
<th>Category</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>Previous report of "at risk" referred to concerns on the performance of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing variant. Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review announcement to change procurement strategy and using US indices this is now assessed as "Forecast to be met".</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>Previous Key Performance Measure referred to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Mission performance and was reported in MPR10 as "at risk". Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review announcement to change the procurement strategy to procure the Carrier Variant this Key Performance Measure has been removed and replaced the US Programme Key Performance Measure for Carrier Variant recovery measuring the landing speed onto the carrier.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Based on modelling and simulation results, the range capability for Joint Strike Fighter Short Take Off and Vertical Landing is approaching the specified target set for UK requirements based on UK Operating scenarios. However, this potential shortfall is based primarily on modelling with very limited experience in actual flight test. Further flight testing is planned to gain an accurate assessment of this potential problem and mitigation actions will be developed accordingly.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>This KUR represents a measure of the amount of support equipment required to allow Joint Combat Aircraft to be deployed on operations. As the Joint Strike Fighter system design has matured, the amount and design of equipment required for deployment in support of Joint Combat Aircraft has reduced to below the contractually specified requirement.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>The Short Take Off element of KUR 04 (based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be changed in the ongoing KUR review, although current projections indicate robust Short Take Off performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight challenges and propulsion system integration issues place the Vertical Landing Bring Back element of KUR 04 at increased risk; the Integrated Project Team has commenced programme action to amend the System Development and Demonstration contract to satisfy a requirement to undertake Ship-borne Rolling Vertical Landing.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Subject to intensive programme action by Prime Contractor. Funded design options that significantly reduce risk have been identified and further changes will be considered in due course.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Operational Impact of variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th>Operational impact of variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>To be Met</td>
<td>As a result of the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review decision to purchase the Carrier Variant, this measure is now assessed as 'To be met'.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>To be Met</td>
<td>As a result of the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review decision to purchase the Carrier Variant, this measure is now assessed as 'To be met'.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2011</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>To be Met</td>
<td>As a result of the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review decision to purchase the Carrier Variant, this measure is now assessed as 'To be met'.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>To be Met (with risks)</td>
<td>Inability to strike some targets at the extreme range capability of aircraft and weapon system.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>To be Met (with risks)</td>
<td>Severely limits the operational effectiveness of the platform and result in high waste of weapons</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>To be Met (with risks)</td>
<td>Limits the use of Joint Combat Aircraft within medium scale operations</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Support Contract
