---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate Projects
Project: Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
Page_from: 142.0
Page_to: 148.0
Project_label: Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_142_148.md
---
Team Responsible

Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Merlin

Senior Responsible Officer

Equipment Capability (Deterrent & Underwater Capability)

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Post Main Investment Decision – Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme will Update 30 Merlin Mk1 Aircraft to Overcome Existing and Forecast Obsolescence Within the Weapon System Avionics to Ensure Sustainment of the Required Capability until the Planned Out of Service Date (2029). the Converted Aircraft will be Known as the Merlin Mk2.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Following Approval of the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Initial Gate Business Case, the Assessment Phase Contract Was Placed in June 2003. the Main Assessment Phase Activities Comprised:

-   Analysis of the User Requirements and Development of a Consolidated Set of System Requirements in the Form of a Systems Requirements Document.

-   Production of System and Sub-System Design Requirements, and Seeking Initial Costed Proposals from Potential Suppliers.

-   Conducting Trade-Off Studies to Identify the Best Value Solution where Options Exist.

-   Developing a Coherent Plan for Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, Aligned to Other Existing and Planned Merlin Programmes.

-   Undertaking Integrated Test, Evaluation and Acceptance Planning.

-   Identification of the Risks to the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme, and the Identification and Implementation of Mitigation Action to Reduce the Impact to an Acceptable Level.

-   Produce Documentation and Costed Proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. • Undertaking Initial Integrated Logistic Support Activities to Define a Solution Compliant with the Evolving Support Solution Envelope.

Future Rotorcraft Capability Review

During the Assessment Phase, MOD Embarked on a Review of all Future Rotorcraft Requirements under the Title of the Future Rotorcraft Capability Review. the Demonstration & Manufacture Proposal that Had Been Provided by Industry and the Associated Business Case Were Produced Before the Impact of the Future Rotorcraft Capability Review Was Known. the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Was Reviewed as Part of the Wider Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme. the Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme Determined that the Balance of Financial Investment over the First Four Years of the Equipment Programme Between Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme and Lynx Wildcat Should be on a 50/50, 30/70, 30/70, 30/70 Basis Respectively.

To Allow Industry to Continue Critical Path Activity and to Support the Reprogramming Activities Resulting from Future Rotorcraft Capability, the Future Rotorcraft Capability Programme Provided Transition Phase Funding (Six Months) to the Merlin Integrated Project Team for an Extension to the Assessment Phase Contract.

A Further Transition Phase (Six Months) Was Required to Again Sustain Programme Momentum, Align it with Wider Future Rotorcraft Capability Requirements and Maintain Programme Viability During the Approvals Process.

## A.3. Progress

The Programme Remains on Track, Following Successful Completion of the Training System Design Reviews (April and September 2009). the Production of the Trials Aircraft Has Commenced and is on Track for First Flight in January-March 2011.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Merlin Mk1 is Responsible for Delivering Protection to the Royal Navy’s Fleet from Sub Surface Threats. It also Provides a Significant Contribution to their Overall Situational Awareness both above and Below the Water. the Programme is Designed to Sustain the Capability Out to the Current Out of Service Date. Without this Programme the Ability to Detect Sub-Surface Threats Would be Reduced or if the Obsolescence Issues Were Addressed Through an Alternate Strategy (Piecemeal Approach) Lead to a Large Increase in Through Life Costs.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td Colspan="4">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project</Td>
<td Colspan="4">single Tender with Lockheed Martin (Merlin Mk1 Prime Contractor)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>lockheed Martin Aero Systems Integration Corporation (Significant

(60% by Value) Sub-Contract with

AgustaWestlan D, Yeovil)</Td>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price until 2010, then Fixed Price Subject to Variation of Price</Td>
<td>non-Competitive Prime but ~60%
Competition at Sub Contract Level (Across

both Prime and AgustaWestland Contracts)
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

The Support Strategy of the Merlin Mk2 will be the Same as that Employed for the Current UK Merlin

(Mk1 & Mk3), Namely Integrated Merlin Operational Support Contract. Integrated Merlin Operational Support is a Whole Life Aircraft Availability Contract that is Priced by Flying Hours Within a Defined Band with Incentives to Generate Fit-for Purpose Aircraft to the Front Line. There are Five Key Elements of the Integrated Merlin Operational Support Service:

Service Management

Aircraft Provision

Materiel Support

Technical Support

Training

It is a 25 Year Contract (Commenced in 2006) and Priced in Five Year Tranches. the Current Pricing Period Has an Approval of \\\. While Providing Support to the Majority of the Merlin Helicopter, There are Exclusions, Namely the Engines and Other Common Use Items that are Supported Elsewhere.

### A.7.1. Support / Service / PFI Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme
</Td>
<td>
AgustaWestlan d (Yeovil)
</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Flying Hours to
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Firm Price
</Td>
<td>
Single Tender
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>primed, with a Lockheed Martin Sub Contract</Td>
<td Colspan="2">the UK’s Merlin Helicopter Forces.</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>19</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>2%</Td>
<td>2%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>transition Phase for Future Rotorcraft Capability</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>27</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
828
</Td>
<td>
837
</Td>
<td>
840
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year

Variation

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>840</Td>
<td>829</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>840</Td>
<td>829</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Merlin CSPt Date Variation (£m) Factor Reason for Variation

Reduction in Outturn Costs Arising

March 2010 -1 Technical Factor from Reduced Impact of Inflation as a Result of Earlier than Planned Completion of Work.

Reduction in Outturn Costs Arising from Reduced Impact of Inflation as

Historic -3 Technical Factor

a Result of Earlier than Planned Completion of Work.

Accounting

Historic +1 Adjustments and Increase in Cost of Capital Due to

Re-Definitions Earlier Completion of Work.

Delivery of Intangible Development Accounting Expenditure Now Coincides with the Historic -6 Adjustments and First Production Aircraft Delivery.

Re-Definitions Previously it Had Been with the Fifth Aircraft, a Year Later (-£6m).

Historic +1 Budgetary £15m of CDEL Funding Was

Factors Brought Forward During Equipment Programme 07 which Has Resulted in a Subsequent Increase in the Cost of Capital (+£1m).

Difference Between the Risk and

Historic -3 Risk Differential Uncertainty Allowed for in the 50%
~confidence\ And\ The\ Approved\ Not~

To Exceed Figures at Main Gate.

Net Variation -11

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 67%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Unit Production Costs (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project</Td>
<td>
10
</Td>
<td>
9
</Td>
<td>
30
</Td>
<td>
30
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2009</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2010</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>27</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>27</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>208</Td>
<td>104</Td>
<td>312</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure (£m)</Td>
<td>235</Td>
<td>104</Td>
<td>339</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
March 2006
</Td>
<td>
May 2003
</Td>
<td>34</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
Aug13
</Td>
<td>
Feb 14
</Td>
<td>
Sep 14
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
The Operational Capability of the Delivered Aircraft Shall be Such that Commander-in-Chief Fleet (Advised by Combined Test Team) are Able to Declare that Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme is Ready for
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>operational Deployment in the Specified Roles. a Cumulative Total of at Least Six Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme Aircraft Delivered to Royal Naval Air Station Culdrose. Logistic Support Available to Enable the Operation and Maintenance of all the Delivered Aircraft. Sufficient Trained Personnel to Achieve Required Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
September 2014
</Td>
<td>
February 2014
</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1. MERLIN CSP

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</Td>
<td>
Difference Between the Risk and Uncertainty Allowed for in the 50%
Confidence and the Approved not to Exceed Figures at Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – not Applicable

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation – not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
### C.4.2. Progress Report
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td>
Full Operating Capability
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>merlin Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
Programme Remains on Track
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

### D.1.1. Merlin CSP

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>maturity Area</Th>
<th>maturity Scale</Th>
<th>last Years Assessment</Th>
<th>current Assessment</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>commercial</Td>
<td Rowspan="3"></Td>
<td Colspan="3" Rowspan="3">
<em>measures under Development</Em>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>financial</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project Management</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Readiness</Td>
<td>1-9</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>5</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technology Readiness</Td>
<td>1-9</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>n</Th>
<th Colspan="4">ot Required for Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Line of
</Td>
<td>description</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
Forecast
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>development</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
To be Met
</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>not to be Met</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Required Equipment (Aircraft and Ground Equipment)
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Trained People, Including Training Systems
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Necessary Support Products to Enable Logistics Support Date to be Met
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Necessary Changes to Extant Infrastructure to Support the Required Capability
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Sufficient People (Aircrew and Maintainers) to Support Capability
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Update Mk1 Concepts &amp; Doctrine to Reflect Capability Delivered Through Mk2
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Review/Update Organisation to Reflect Changes Caused by Introduction of Mk2
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Manage Information and Interface to Data Providers/Users, Including Interface to Defence Information Infrastructure.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
100%
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
0%
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>training &amp; Personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
A Number of Mitigation Measures Have Been Implemented that Have Reduced the Risk. This Includes a Phased Closure Approach and Additional Factory Training to Ensure Sufficient Trained People are Available to Support the Required Force Elements at Readiness.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training &amp; Personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Affordability Decision Taken Prior to Contract Award Meant that the Ability to Train Mk1 Personnel Concurrently with Conversion of the Training Facilities to the Mk2 Standard Was not Possible. This Gives Rise to the Risk that Trained Personnel will not be Available to Sustain Mk1 Capability to Its Out of Service and Develop Those Required for Mk2. a Number of Mitigation Activities are Underway to Minimise the Impact of this Risk.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Merlin CSP

### D.3.1.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</Td>
<td>1, 5</Td>
<td>
Attack. the User Shall be Able to Neutralise Confirmed Anti-Submarine Warfare Threats.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>02</Td>
<td>1, 2</Td>
<td>
Deployable Search and Rescue (Maritime Only).
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Conduct Naval Search and Rescue.</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>03</Td>
<td>1, 3</Td>
<td>environment. the User Shall be Able to Operate in Environments World-Wide.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>04</Td>
<td>1, 5</Td>
<td>find. the User Shall be Able to Acquire Situational Awareness of the Under Water Effect and Above Water Effect.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>05</Td>
<td>1, 8</Td>
<td>interoperability. the User Shall be Able to Exchange Tactical Information Between Authorities and Units.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>06</Td>
<td>1, 5</Td>
<td>lift. the User Shall be Able to Move Personnel and Material over Land and Sea.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>07</Td>
<td>2, 3</Td>
<td>logistical. the User Shall be Able to Easily Logistically Support the Merlin Capability Sustainment Programme.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>08</Td>
<td>1, 5</Td>
<td>operational Availability. the User Shall be Able to Have Available Force Elements at a Time and Place as Required to Complete the Mission.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>09</Td>
<td>1, 4</Td>
<td>operational Locations. the Solution Shall be Able to Operate to and from Host Platforms when Required.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>1, 2</Td>
<td>survivability. the User Shall Have Force Elements Capable of Surviving in Hostile and Warfighting Environments.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
100%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0%
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation – not Applicable

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of Variation- Not Applicable

### D.3.2. Support Contract – not Applicable
