---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Astute Class Submarines
Page_from: 50.0
Page_to: 80.0
Project_label: Astute Class Submarines
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_50_80.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 57%" />
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th Colspan="3"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Astute
</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Submarine Production
</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td Colspan="2">planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Richard Stokes (Deterrent and Under Water Capability)
</Td>
<td>19th June 2012</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Astute Boats 1-3 Astute Boat 4 Astute Boat 5 Astute Boat 6 Astute Boat 7
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post Main Investment Decision

Post Main Investment Decision Post Main Investment Decision

Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
<td>
TRUE TRUE TRUE TRUE

FALSE</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Military Requirement is for Up to 8 Astute Class Submersible Ship Nuclear to Replace the Existing Trafalgar Class of Nuclear Powered Attack Submarine.

Astute Class Submarines are Required to Perform a Range of Military Tasks; These Unique Requirements are Combined Within the Astute Design to Provide Global Reach, Endurance, Covertness, Sustained High Speed and the Ability to Conduct Unsupported Operations in Hostile Environments.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

In June 1991 (Equivalent of Initial Gate) Approval Was Given to Proceed with a Programme of Studies at an Estimated Cost of £6 Million (1991/1992 Prices) to Define the Batch 2 Trafalgar Class Boat (Now Known as the Astute Class). This Programme of Studies Led to the Issue of an Invitation to Tender for the Design and Build of an Initial Batch of Three Astute Class Submersible Ship Nuclear and a Further Approval of £2 Million (1992/1993 Prices) for Contractor and Defence Research Agency Support to MOD During the Tendering Exercise in 1994.

In July 1994, as a Result of Concerns over the Overall Affordability of the Programme, Minister (Defence Procurement) and the Treasury Approved a Further £24 Million (at 1993/1994 Prices) for Risk Reduction Studies to be Undertaken in Parallel with the Formal Bid Phase of the Project. to Maintain an Effective Competition, Contracts for Risk Reduction Were Awarded to both Bidders, GEC Marconi (Now BAE Systems (Submarine Solutions)) and Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd.

GEC-Marconi Was Identified as MOD’s Preferred Bidder in December 1995. Using the Policy of No Acceptable Price No Contract, a Prime Contract Was Placed in March 1997 for the Design, Build and Initial in Service Support of the First Three of the Class.

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

For Astute Class Programme Historical Data Please Refer to Previous MPRs

Planning Rounds

In 2009 a Savings Measure Option Was Taken Removing £139 Million of Funding from Astute Boats 2-7 from 2009 to 2013. the Savings Resulted in Delayed Delivery of Boats 2-4, which Were Already in Build and Deferred Build Start Dates and the Procurement of Long Lead Items for Boats 5-7. as a Consequence of This, Cost Growths Occured in Later Years as Reported in more Detail in MPR 09. During Planning Rounds 10 and 11 Boats 2 to 7 Were Delayed Further to Align with the Deferred Successor Deterrent Programme, Culminating in the Strategic Defence and Security Review and the Value for Money Review which Delayed the Successor in Service Date to 2028 and Further Delayed the Astute Class Programme to Sustain Industry. Together this Forms the Planning Rounds 11 and 12 Baseline.

Boat 1 HMS ASTUTE

HMS ASTUTE Successfully Completed First Dive and Initial Series of Dived Trials During February and March 2010, and Successfully Completed Full Power Trials and Deep Dive 30 April 2010.

In Service Date Based on Meeting the above Criteria Was Declared and Agreed by Investment Appraisal

Board in July 2010, Retrospectively Back Dated to 30 April 2010. HMS ASTUTE Continued with the Contractor's Sea Trials Programme Covering Platform and Initial Capability Proving Trials, Interspersed with Planned Maintenance and Defect Rectification Periods.

HMS ASTUTE Was Commissioned, by the Duchess of Cornwall the Boat's Patron, into the Royal Navy at Her Majesty’s Naval Base Clyde on 27 August 2010.

On 22 October 2010 HMS ASTUTE Was Involved in a Grounding and Collision Incident Whilst on Sea Trials Near the Isle of Skye and the British Underwater Test and Evaluation Centre on the West Coast of Scotland. the Submarine Was Floated Off after 12 Hours and Following Evaluation by the Head of

Submarine Production Team and BAE Systems Engineers She Returned to Her Majesty’s Naval Base Clyde under Her Own Power. the Submarine Was Repaired on the Faslane Ship Lift and Left the Facility on 24 November.

HMS ASTUTE Reached Contract Acceptance Stage 1 Platform Demonstration, on 29 November 2010 from which Point it is Managed as an in-Service Submarine under MOD Rather than Contractor Direction.

HMS ASTUTE Returned to Sea in Early December 2010 for Training to Re-Validate Its Navigational Certification. the Sea Trials Programme Has Been Delayed by Ten Months Due to First of Class Technical Issues, Including Modification of the Internal Communication System and the Actions Required Recovering from the Grounding.

Boat 2 AMBUSH

Boat 2 Reactor Core Load Was Completed in November 2010 with the Submarine Named on 16 December 2010 and Launched on 6 January 2011. It Continues Systems Commissioning and Preparations for Power Range Testing Planned for Late 2011 with Sailing on Sea Trials Anticipated Spring 2012.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>boats 3 to 7 During 2007 to 2010 Boats 3 to 7 Have Been Delayed Due to Boat 1 Holding on to Scarce Resource for Longer to Deal with the Technical Issues, and also Due to the MOD Slowing the Programme Down to Realise Early Year Savings. Boat 3 (ARTFUL) Completed Final Hull Unit Welding in May 2010; She is Now a Closed Submarine. Final Stages of Outfitting Continued Throughout the Year. Since the Launch of Boat 2 in January 2011 Boat 4 (AUDACIOUS) Units and Modules are Being Moved Onto the Build Line. in March 2010 Approval for Initial Build Activities for Boat 5 Was Given, and Long Lead Items Were Ordered for Boat 6. ASTUTE CLASS TRAINING SERVICE the Astute Class Training Service (ACTS) Was Established Through a Private Finance Initiative Arrangement, to Deliver the Unique Training Required Following the Introduction of the Astute Class Submarines. Contract Award Was in 2001, with Training Delivery Commencing in 2006. the Current Contract Covers Training for Boats 1-3 Only Because, at the Time of Contract Award, There Was No Approval for the Build of Later Astute Class Submarines. Further Approval Was Received in 2007, to Include Provision for Boat 4 (AUDACIOUS) Within Astute Class Training Service and Work is Underway to Add this to the Contract. SUPPORT in July 2006 an Astute Class Support Review Note Was Approved to Implement an Initial Astute Support Solution for Four Years and 5 Months Elapsed Time, Up to the End of December 2012. STRATEGIC DEFENCE and SECURITY REVIEW in October 2010 Outcome of the Strategic Defence and Security Review Endorsed the Political, Military and Industrial Requirement for a 7-Boat Astute Class Programme Leading to the Successor Deterrent Programme First of Class in Service Date at 2028, Based on a 36 Month Nuclear Powered Ballistic Submarine Production Drumbeat. Part of the Astute Class Programmes Objectives is to Sustain Industry for Successor;
Therefore the Revised Plan for Astute Class Programme Extended Timeframes by an Average of 14 Months per Boat. a Review Note to Secure Approval for Revised Time and Cost Parameters will be Submitted to Her Majesty’s Treasury Before September 2011.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.4. in-Year Progress

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>approvals on 20th July 2011 Her Majesty’s Treasury Approved Revised Time and Costs for Boats 1 to 4 and Approved Main Build for Boat 5, Initial Build for Boat 6 and Long Lead Items for Boat 7. at this Time the Investment Approvals Committee also Approved in-Service Dates for Boats 5, 6 and 7. Boat 1 HMS ASTUTE in June 2011 HMS ASTUTE Successfully Completed the UK Phase of Contractor Sea Trials. While on a Comprehensive Sea Trials Programme in US Waters the Submarine Successfully Completed the First of Class British Tomahawk Land Attack Missiles Firing Trials, Final Spearfish Deep Discharge Trials and Underwater Magnetic Silencing; Returning to Her Majesty’s Naval Base Clyde in March 2012 to Commence Base Maintenance Period Number 6, Completion of which is Planned to be Late Autumn 2012. as a Further Element of the First of Class Sea Trials Programme HMS ASTUTE Has Been Fitted with a Payload Bay and will Prove and Demonstrate this Additional Capability During the Next Phase of Sea Trails. Boat 2 AMBUSH Boat 2 AMBUSH Was Launched and Lowered in to the Basin Outside of the Devonshire Dock Hall on 6 January 2011. Fitting Out of the Submarine Has Been Completed and the Vessel is Now Undergoing a Rigorous Period of Trials and Testing Prior to Exiting the Shipyard. the Submarine Successfully Completed Her First Test Dive in the Shipyard’s Basin in Early October 2011. This is a Critical Milestone Ahead of the Boat’s Planned Exit from Barrow. Boats 3 to 5 Boat 3 ARTFUL Continues Construction in the Devonshire Dock Hall at Barrow and is Making Good Progress with Diesel Generator Trials Successfully Completed in August 2011. It is Anticipated that ARTFUL will Leave the Devonshire Dock Hall in 2013 and Exit Barrow Approximately 12 Months Later to Commence Sea Trials. Boat 4 AUDACIOUS; all Hull and Casing Units Have Been Moved to the Devonshire Dock Hall and a Number of the Internal Equipment Modules Have also Been Shipped Inside the Respective Units. First Phase of Reactor Loop Build Was Successfully Completed and Main Propulsion Machinery Package Shore Trials Have Begun (Pre-Shipping). Two Key Pressure Hull Unit-to-Unit Welds Have Commenced. Boat 5 ANSON Had Her ‘keel Laid’ on 13th October 2011, at a Traditional Keel Laying Ceremony where the Minister for International Security Strategy, Gerald Howarth Unveiled a Section of Her Hull. ASTUTE CLASS TRAINING SERVICE the Astute Class Training Service (ACTS) Has Provided Training for the Ships Companies of both HMS ASTUTE and AMBUSH Throughout the Last Twelve Months. This Year Saw the First Delivery of the Submariner Qualification Course for the Royal Navy. a Formal Notice of Change Was Issued to the Training Service Provider, FAST Training Services Limited, for the Inclusion of Boat 4 AUDACIOUS into the Training Service Programme. on 15th February 2012 the Investment Approvals Committee Approved the Astute Class Training Service Boat 4 Information Note which Articulated a Revised Funding Approach for the ACTS Boat 4 Change Delivering a Saving Against the 2007 Astute Class Training Service Boat 4 Approval. Boat 4 will be Placed on Contract with FAST During 2013. SUPPORT Our Revised Approval Sought to Extend the Principles and Structure of the Initial Astute Support Solution Model to Operational Handover (Plus 3 Months) for Each of the 7 Submarines. the Additional 3 Months Post Operational Handover is to Capture any Residual Transition Costs that Fall Beyond the Operational Handover Milestone for Each Submarine.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.5. Capability Risks

Delivery of Boat 1 is Critical to Attack Submarine’s Readiness Profile. Boat 1’s Delay will Result in the Delayed Introduction of Improved Capability over Current Classes. the Astute Class will also De-Risk Capability Essential for an Affordable Successor Deterrent Programme.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>swiftsure &amp;
Trafalgar Class Update Final Phase</Td>
<td>2004</Td>
<td>in- Service</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Astute Boats 1-3
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems

Maritime- Submarines (Formerly BAE Systems

(Submarine Solutions) and BAE Systems

Electronics Ltd – Astute Class

Project and BAE Systems Astute Class Ltd)
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to in-Service
</Td>
<td>boat One – Target Cost Incentive Fee

Boats Two &amp; Three
– Target Cost Incentive Fee with Maximum Prices
</Td>
<td>
Competitive - UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>astute Boat 4</Th>
<th>bae Systems Maritime- Submarines</Th>
<th>boat 4 and Design for Cost Reduction for Boats 4 to 7</Th>
<th>
Limit of Liability for

1st Three Years of Seven Year Build Programme.

Working Towards

Inclusion of Target Costs Incentive

Fee for Whole Boat 4. a Revised Procurement Strategy for

Remainder of Astute Class is under Development Following the Outcome of the Strategic Defence and Security Review.</Th>
<th>single Source</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>bae Systems Maritime- Submarines</Td>
<td>boat 5 Long Lead Items &amp; Initial Build</Td>
<td>limit of Liability Placed for Minimum Long Lead Items Scope of Work</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>bae Systems Maritime- Submarines</Td>
<td>
Boat 6 Long Lead

Items</Td>
<td>limit of Liability Placed for Minimum Long Lead Items Scope of Work</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>bae Systems Maritime- Submarines</Td>
<td>
Boat 7 Long Lead

Items</Td>
<td>limit of Liability Placed for Minimum Long Lead Items Scope of Work</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 2%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="7">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="5">
The Initial Astute Support Solution Was Approved in July 2006; it Follows a Traditional Support Model, but Recognises Astute’s Differences and Introduces Additional Arrangements as Appropriate. Provision Has Been Made to Employ the Build Contractor (BAE Systems) as the Astute Technical Authority; MOD will be the Approving Authority, with the Nuclear Propulsion Project Team Responsible for the Nuclear Steam Raising Plant. MOD Equipment Project Teams will Support Specific Equipments with Head of in-Service Submarine (Head of Submarine Production Up to Operational Handover) Maintaining a Platform Focus and Providing the Flotilla Wide Single Point of Contact for Navy Command. Astute Class Maintenance at the Waterfront will be Conducted under Existing Warship Support Modernisation Initiative Arrangements. the Astute Class Training Service is a Private Finance Initiative Contract, Initially Approved for 36 Years to Provide Astute Class Specific Training to the Royal Navy for Boats 1-3. Approval Was Given in 2007, to Extend to a 38 Year Contract, to Cover the Life of Boat 4. Approval for Later Boats will be Considered During FY11/12 to Support an Approvals Strategy for Training to be Presented as Part of Submarine Training and Education Programme During FY12/13
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">support Title</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td Colspan="2">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">technical Authority Support Contract</Td>
<td>bae Systems</Td>
<td>provision of Technical Authority Services</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td Colspan="2">single Source</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">astute Class Training Sevice Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>fast Training

Services Limited;
47.5% Owned by BAE Systems, 47.5% Owned by L-

3 MAPPS and 5% Owned by VT Group</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>pfi</Td>
<td Colspan="2">competitive Tender</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">astute Class Training Sevice Boats 4-7</Td>
<td>fast Training

Services Limited;
47.5% Owned by BAE Systems, 47.5% Owned by L-

3 MAPPS and 5% Owned by VT Group</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>pfi</Td>
<td Colspan="2">single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute</Td>
<td>33</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>33</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
2233
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>
1224
</Td>
<td>
1279
</Td>
<td>
1351
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>
1369
</Td>
<td>
1464
</Td>
<td>
1467
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
632
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
325
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>2233</Td>
<td>3386</Td>
<td>+1153</Td>
<td>-94</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>1279</Td>
<td>1448</Td>
<td>+169</Td>
<td>+44</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>1464</Td>
<td>1453</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>+26</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>632</Td>
<td>617</Td>
<td>-15</Td>
<td>-13</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>325</Td>
<td>300</Td>
<td>-25</Td>
<td>-25</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>5933</Td>
<td>7204</Td>
<td>+1271</Td>
<td>-62</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Astute Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>
-30
</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>submarine Enterprise Performance Programme Saving Option</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>
-43
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Contract Decreases (a Mixture of Overheads, Material and Labour). (-£36m). Non Prime Decreases (a Mixture of Combat Systems, Nuclear Power Management, Safety Platform and Desing and Other Non Construction Costs). (-£7m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td>receipts</Td>
<td>shipbuilders Relief not Claimed in Forecast Year 2011/12 (£1m)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>april 2011</Th>
<th>-5</Th>
<th>receipts</Th>
<th>change in Profile of Shipbuilders Relief. (-£5m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>-17</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Contract Decreases (a Mixture of Overheads, Material and Labour). (-£18m). Non Prime Decreases (a Mixture of Combat Systems, Nuclear Power Management, Safety Platform and Design and Other Non Construction Costs). (+£1m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Contract Increases (a Mixture of Overheads, Materials and Labour). (+£6m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>non Prime Increases (a Mixture of Combat Systems, Nuclear Power Management, Safety Platform and Design and Other Non Construction Costs) (+28m). This is as a Result of Aligning the Non Prime Costs to the Revised Deferred Build Programme Issued under Planning Round 2011 Option.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+144</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>an Option Was Taken During the 2011 Planning Round to Defer the Successor in-Service Date and Modify Build Delivery Rate. Astute Build
"Drumbeat" Was Revised to Match Successor Revised in-Service Date. (+£144m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>cost of HMS Astute's Grounding Incident. (+£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-412</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury (£412m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+22</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Contract Increases (a Mixture of Overheads, Materials and Labour). (+£31m). Non Prime Decrease (a Mixture of Combat Systems, Nuclear Power Management, Safety Platform and Design and Other Non Construction Costs) (-£9m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>receipts</Td>
<td>increase in Receipt for Shipbuilders Relief (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+9</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>a Savings Option, Defer Successor (Future Deterrent) in Service Date and Modify the Build Programme of Later Astute Hulls, Was Taken in Planning Round 2010 which Increases the Cost of Astute Boats 1-3 by (£9m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+40</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Increases (a Mixture of Labour, Materials, Subcontractors and Risk/Indemnity/Warranty and Other Construction Costs) (+£76m). Non Prime Decrease (a Mixture of Combat Systems, Nuclear Power Management, Safety Platform and Design and Other Non Construction Costs) (-£36m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>receipts</Td>
<td>reduction in Receipt for Shipbuilders Relief (+£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+87</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>a Savings Option Was Taken in the 2009 Planning Round which Removed
£139m of Funding over the 4 Years from 2009/10 from the Astute Boats 2-7 Build Programme, the Consequent Programme Slippage Results in Additional Cost Growth in Later Years of £539m. of This, £87m Relates to Boats 1-3.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-23</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>increase in Shipbuilders Relief (-
£12m). Re-Costing of NonAttributable Items Since MPR06 (Items not Included in the Original Approval) (+£51m). Shipbuilders Relief (-£58m) and Sunk Cost Corrections (-£3m) Made in Project Account. Decommissioning and Decontamination Costs (-£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+47</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>reallocation of Pension Cost Increases Since MPR05 (-£5m). Re-Costing of Non-Attributable Items Since MPR07 (i.e. Those Items not Included in Original Approval) (+£28m). Shipbuilders Relief Correction (+£6m). Recosting of Non-Attributable Items Since MPR05 (Items not Included in the Original Approval) (+£29m). Removal of Items Wrongly Attributed to Astute Approval in Previous Years (£11m)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-177</Th>
<th>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Th>
<th>decrease Reflects Difference Between Anticipated Resource Profile at Approval and Current Profile (Equipment Plan 2001) (£74m). Removal of Astute Class Training Service Costs that Have Been Incorrectly Included in Previous MPRs – Training not Part of Original Astute Main Gate Approval (-£62m). Removal of Items Wrongly Attributed to Astute Approval in Previous Years (-£41m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+257</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>includes Change to Fore End Design, Completion of Land Attack Missile Capability and Improved Tactical Data Link Capability (+£32m). Additional Capability Originally Part of Astute Second Buy which Has Been Brought Forward into the First Buy (+£225m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+39</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>bae Systems to Forego any Incentive Payments on Boat One(-£13m). Reduction in Warranty to be Provided by BAE Systems from Three Years to One Year (-£3m). Planned Contract Amendments (+£55m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+40</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>variation Between Anticipated Rates for GDP and Variation on Price on Contract (Sunk Costs Only) (+£14m). Correction in Previous Variation on Price Calculation – Incorrect Split Between Labour and Materials (+£26m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+115</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>sustainability Costs of Maintaining Submarine Build Capability Removed (-£204m). Option E07UW178S – Capability Reduction to a 7 Boat Astute Programme, Taken in Equipment Plan 2007 (-£29m). Option E07UW601S – Compress Astute Class Boats1-3 Sea Trials Programme, Taken in EP07 (-
£3m). Cost Growth from Review Year 06 to EP07. Materials (+£164m), Labour (+£68m), GDP (+£65m), Risk (+£50m), Profit (+£7m), Non-Prime (£66m), Overhead (-£12m), Shipbuilder Relief (+£58m). Cost Growth in Provision of some Elements of Nuclear Safety Cases (+£17m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+272</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>departmental Review Identified Savings Opportunities Within Other Elements of Nuclear Safety Cases (-£20m). Increase in Cost as a Result of the Reassessment of Risk, Specifically, Team Leader Challenge in MPR05 (+£123m). Cost Increase Identified as Part of the Integrated Project Team’s Internal Review in 2005/06 Prime Contract Overheads (+£97m), Prime Contract Materials (+£61m), Prime Contract Labour (+£26m) and Unallocated Cost Growth (+£21m). Changes in Throughput Assumptions Between MPR05 and MPR06 (£73m). Reduced Requirement for Technology Insertion Post MPR05 (CDEL
-£17m. Prime Contract Pricing Assumptions and Changes to Costing (+£19m). Reassessment of Risk (+£51m). Reduction of Risk on Sonar 2076 Programme (-£16m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+751</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Costing of Land Attack Missile Interface &amp; Integration (+£5m). Re-Costing of External Communications (+£5m). Increase in Overall BAE Systems Base Costs (Shipyard and Sub Contracts) Reflecting a Re-
Estimate as Well as Cost of Delay (+£571m). Increase in Risk Provision Owing to Technical Complexity (+£152m). Changed Cost Reflecting Astute Agreement of February 2003 (+£52m). Reassessment of Overhead Rates Used in Costing (-£36m).manhour Reduction on Prime Contract (-£20m).removal of Risk Funding Post Boat 3 Delivery (-£2m). Expenditure not Apportionable to Specific Elements of the Programme Due to 2007 Budgeting Baseline Being Overstated which Has Subsequently Been Corrected (+£25m). Prime Increase (+£27m). Non Prime Decrease (£28m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+1153</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.2 Astute Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+51</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increase Driven by Changes to the Prime Data (Labour, Overheads, Material) (+£51m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>a Decrease in 11/12 Forecast of Outturn Year Due to Combat Systems (-£4m), Platform (£3m), Core H9 (-£2m) Offset by an Increase in Prime Contract for Baseband Coherency (+£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+56</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>an Option Was Taken During the 2011 Planning Round to Defer the Successor in-Service Date and Modify Build Delivery Rate. Astute Build Drumbeat Was Revised to Match Successor Revised in-Service Date. (+56m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+15</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Contract Increase, a Mixture of Labour Overheads, Materials and VAT (+£20m). Non Prime Contract Decrease, a Mixture of Electric Boat, Government Furnished Materiel and Nuclear (-£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-26</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Contract Decrease, a Mixture of Labour Overheads, Materials and VAT (-£25m). Non Prime Contract Decrease, a Mixture of Combat Systems and Nuclear (-£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+10</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>a Savings Option to Defer Successor (Future Deterrent) InService Date and Modify the Build Programme of Later Astute Hulls, Was Taken in Planning Round 2010 which Increases the Cost of Boats 4-7 by £322m. of This, £10m Relates to Boat 4.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+102</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>a Savings Option Was Taken in the 2009 Planning Round which Removed
£139m of Funding over the 4 Years from 2009/10 from the Astute Boats 2-7 Build Programme, the Consequent Programme Slippage Results in Additional Cost Growth in Later Years of £539m. of This, £102m Relates to Boat 4.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increase in Build, Nuclear Plant and Safety Costs (+£19m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-51</Td>
<td>receipts</Td>
<td>vat Receipt Relating to Sunk Costs (-£51m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+169</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.3 Astute Boat 5

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+55</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Data Increase in Future Years Against Pre Approval Baseline Profile, Driven by a Mixture of Labour, Overheads and Materials (+£55m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+21</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>prime Data Increase in FY11/12 Against Pre Approval Baseline Profile, Driven by a Mixture of Labour, Overheads and Materials (+£21m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-50</Td>
<td>receipts</Td>
<td>vat Receipt Relating to Sunk Costs (-£50m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+11</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>a Savings Option to Defer Successor (Future Deterrent) InService Date and Modify the Build Programme of Later Astute Hulls, Was Taken in Planning Round 2010 which Increases the Cost of Boats 4-7 by £322m. of This, £11m Relates to Boat 5.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-15</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in the Expected Cost of Boat 5 Reactor Core.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-33</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>the Variance of £32m Generated Between the Expected Cost Outturn of Boat 5 and the Relevant Boat 5 Approval Results from the Boat Re-Design Activities, an Element of which Have Been Approved Against Boats 4 and 5, as a Batch Solution, but are Contracted for Solely Against Boat 4. as the Redesign Work is a Batch Solution BAE Have not Been Able to Provide Costs on a Boat by Boat Basis which Would Align with Separate IAB Approvals. Sunk Costs Have Therefore Been Scored Against the Boat 4 Within the Submarine Project Team Accounts which Has Created the Variation Between Outturn Boat Costs and Boat Approval for Boat 5.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.4 Astute Boat 6

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-11
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>impact of Option Taken Against the Astute Batch 2 Programme to Reprofile Costings. the £11m Has Come Back into the Programme but Outside of the Time Line of the Existing Boat 6 Approval.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>prime Data Decrease in FY11/12 Against Pre- Approval Baseline Profile, Driven by a Mixture of Labour, Overheads and Materials (-£2m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>revised Estimate of Cost of the Nuclear Reactor Core for Astute Boat 6. (-£1m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury.(+£1m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>revised Estimate of Cost of the Nuclear Reactor Core for Astute Boat 6 (-£2m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-15
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.5 Astute Boat 7

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-25
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>impact of Option Taken Against the Astute Batch 2 Programme to Reprofile Costings. the £25m Has Come Back into the Programme but Outside of the Time Line of the Existing Boat 7 Approval.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-25
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>cost Reduction Due to Re Assessment of the Cost of Supporting Boats. (-£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-25
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>cost Reduction Due to not Needing to Support Boats as a Result of Slippage (-£25m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>initial Astute Support Solution</Td>
<td>315</Td>
<td>269</Td>
<td>-46</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>151</Td>
<td>660</Td>
<td>+509</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Class Training Service Boat 4</Td>
<td>260</Td>
<td>201</Td>
<td>-59</Td>
<td>-117</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
726
</Td>
<td>
1130
</Td>
<td>
+404
</Td>
<td>
-108
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Initial Astute Support Solution

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Historic
</Th>
<th>
-18
</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>cost Reduction Due to not Needing to Support Boats as a Result of Slippage (-£18m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-46
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.4.1.2 Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+10</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Alignment of Training to the Latest Astute Class Programme (+£10m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>increase in Amount of Recoverable VAT Due to Reassessment of Costs. (+£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Assessment of Costs Relating to Risk, Future Changes to Astute Class Training Service Training and Infrastructure (+£4m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+41</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>an Option Was Taken During the 2011 Planning Round to Defer the Successor in-Service Date and Modify Build Delivery Rate. Astute Build
"Drumbeat" Was Revised to Match Successor Revised in-Service Date which Impacts on Astute Training (+£41m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+15</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>increase in Amount of Recoverable VAT Due to Reassessment of Costs (+£4m). VAT Rate Increase to 20%
(+£11m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Assessment of Costs (-£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in Amount of Recoverable VAT Due to Reassessment of Costs (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+357</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Assessment of Costs for Training/Policy Changes.(+£14m). Re-Alignment of Astute Class Training Service to the Revised Astute Boat Programme and Extending the Contract from 25 to 36 Years. (+£343m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+83</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>addition of Recoverable VAT to Ensure that the Forecast Cost is Consistent with the Approved Cost.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+509</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.4.1.3 Astute Class Training Service Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>-117</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>reduction in Requirement. (£117m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Assessment of Infrastructure Costs and Refinement of Fleet Training Requirements (+£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+48</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>an Option Was Taken During the 2011 Planning Round to Defer the Successor in-Service Date and Modify Build Delivery Rate. Astute Build Drumbeat Was Revised to Match Successor Revised in-Service Date which Impacts on Astute Training. (+£48m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+7</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Assessment of Private Finance Initiative Costs (+£5m). Extension of FAST Training Services Ltd Infrastructure Costs (+£3m). Other Minor Decreases (£1m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-59</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.2 Operational Impact on Support / PFI Cost

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>29</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>4036</Td>
<td>376</Td>
<td>4412</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>218</Td>
<td>88</Td>
<td>306</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>4283</Td>
<td>464</Td>
<td>4747</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>june 1991</Td>
<td>march 1997</Td>
<td>69</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>may 2007</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>june 2011</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
June 2005
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>february 2015</Td>
<td>
August 2015
</Td>
<td>103 Months from Contract Signature</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>
May 2020
</Td>
<td>
August 2020
</Td>
<td>
April 2021
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>february 2022</Td>
<td>
May 2022
</Td>
<td>january 2023</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>
December 2023
</Td>
<td>march 2024</Td>
<td>
November 2024
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>original in Service Date Definition: Contract Acceptance Schedule Stage 1 (Safe Operation and Start of Operational Work Up) MPR2011 Definition: Successful Completion of Deep Dive and Full Power Trials. Reason for Change: In-Service Date Has Been Declared on Successful Completion of Deep Dive and Full Power Trials and Demonstrates that the Submarine can Operate Safely and Independently in the Operational Environment. HMS Astute is Now a Valuable Training Asset for Navy Command. There Was also Financial and Commercial Benefit to MoD Removing the Link Between Contract Acceptance and in-Service Date.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>original in Service Date Definition: Platform and Weapons Acceptance Against all Requirements as Defined Within the Astute Class Through Life Management Plan, Issue 6 Dated April 2006. MPR 2009 Definition: Boat 4 Operational Handover to Fleet Reason for Change: To Align in Service Date with Asset Being Utilised by Navy Command.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>operational Handover to Fleet</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>operational Handover to Fleet</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>operational Handover to Fleet</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>june 2005</Td>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td>58</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>august 2015</Td>
<td>january 2018</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>august 2020</Td>
<td>august 2020</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>may 2022</Td>
<td>may 2022</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>march 2024</Td>
<td>march 2024</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Astute Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>re-Definition of in-Service Date Approved by the Investment Appraisals Board, Giving Retrospective Achievement Date of in-Service Date from July 2010 to April 2010. (-3 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical and Programme Difficulties with Boat 1 First of Class Undertaking Trials for the First Time in 17 Years. (+4 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+10</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>further Delays Have Occurred During Astute (Boat 1) Testing and Commissioning Phase. These Were Caused by Technical Factors the Rapid Resolution of which Was Hampered by the Lack of Skilled Personnel with Recent Submarine Testing and Commissioning Experience. (+10 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+47</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>risk Analysis, Taking into Account Opportunities to Reduce Construction Time, Predicts Most Likely in-Service Date of November 2008 (-1 Month). Risk Analysis, Taking in to Account Opportunities to Reduce Construction Time, Predicts a Most Likely in-Service Date of December 2008 (-1 Month). Exceptional Difficulties Arose with the Introduction of a Computer Aided Design System, the Availability of Trained Staff and Project Management (+43 Months). Effect of Technical Problems Assessed a Six Month Slip in in-Service Date (Completion of the First Phase of Sea Trials) (+6 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+58</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.2 Astute Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+13</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>an Option Was Taken During the 2011 Planning Round to Defer the Successor in-Service Date and Modify Build Delivery Rate. Astute Build Drumbeat Was Revised to Match Successor Revised in-Service Date which Impacts on Astute Operational Handover Dates.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+16</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>a Savings Option Was Taken in the 2009 Planning Round which Removed Funding from Boats 2-7 Build Programme Leading to Delayed Delivery Dates, 16 Months Delay is Attributed to Boat 4. This Variation Was not Shown in MPR10 as the Project Was not Measuring Against the 50% Date at that Time.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+29</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>support Costs and Current Equipment</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>costs from this Delay Have Been Factored and Subsumed into the Department’s Revised Assessment of Force Level Requirements.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>other</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>costs from this Delay Have Been Factored and Subsumed into the Department’s Revised Assessment of Force Level Requirements.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">total</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>the Astute Delay Resulted in the Delayed Introduction of Improved Capability over Current Classes; Such as Improved Detection, Greater Weapon Load and Increased Availability. Since These Delays the Department Has Fully Considered the Plans for Submarine Capability in the Light of this and many Other Factors.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>reduced Ability to Fulfil Fleet Tasking.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>astute Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>foc will be Declared when the Submarines are Available for Operational Tasking I.e Following Achievement of Operational Handover, Generation and Operational Work Up by Navy Command.</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>foc will be Declared when the Submarine is Available for Operational Tasking I.e Following Achievement of Operational Handover, Generation and Operational Work Up by Navy Command.</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>foc will be Declared when the Submarine is Available for Operational Tasking I.e Following Achievement of Operational Handover, Generation and Operational Work Up by Navy Command.</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>foc will be Declared when the Submarine is Available for Operational Tasking I.e Following Achievement of Operational Handover, Generation and Operational Work Up by Navy Command.</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>foc will be Declared when the Submarine is Available for Operational Tasking I.e Following Achievement of Operational Handover, Generation and Operational Work Up by Navy Command.</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.1 Scope of Support / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>scope</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>initial Astute Support Solution</Td>
<td>the BAE Systems Contracted Element of the Initial Astute Support Solution Provides Design Management of the Astute Platform; Maintenance of the Safety Case, Configuration Management of the Design Including Design Change and Maintenance of the Certificate of Design.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Class Training Service</Td>
<td>the Astute Class Training Service is a Private Finance Initiative Contract to Provide Astute Specific Team and Individual Training to the Royal Navy for Boats 1-3. Approval Was Given in 2007, to Extend to a 38 Year Contract, to Cover the Life of Boat 4.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>initial Astute Support Solution</Td>
<td>may 2007</Td>
<td>may 2007</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>january 2004</Td>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>+50</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Class Training Service Boat 4</Td>
<td>
December 2013
</Td>
<td>may 2015</Td>
<td>+17</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation

Initial Astute Support Solution

### C.5.2.2 Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+50
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>re-Alignment of Astute Class Training Service to the Revised Astute Boat Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+50
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.3 Astute Class Training Service Boat 4

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+13</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>aligning Boat 4 Crew Joining and Training Dates with Boat 4 Delivery Post Planning Round 2011 Option Delay (+13 Months)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+22</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>2nd Manoeuvring Room Trainer Procurement No Longer Required in Advance of Boat 4 Due to Greater Understanding of the Impact of Reactor Control &amp; Indication Update on Boats 1-3 Training and Decision to Direct Fund Astute Class Training Service Capital Expenditure Through the PFI, Months to Align Delivery of 2nd MRT with Crew Joining Date and Training Need for Boat 4 (+ 22 Months)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-18</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>to Offset the Risk of Design Changes, Increased Training Throughput and to Ensure Retention of Key Supplier Resources.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+17</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.3 Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract End Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>initial Astute Support Solution</Td>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3</Td>
<td>
September 2026
</Td>
<td>
September 2037
</Td>
<td>+132</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Class Training Service Boat 4</Td>
<td>
September 2039
</Td>
<td>
September 2039
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation

Initial Astute Support Solution

### C.5.3.2 Astute Class Training Service Boats 1-3

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+72
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>re-Alignment of Astute Class Training Service to the Revised Astute Boat Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+60
</Td>
<td>procurement

Processes
</Td>
<td>decision to Extend Contract by 5 Years to Obtain Better Value for Money.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+132
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.3 Astute Class Training Service Boat 4

## C.5.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Support Cost Variation

## C.5.5 Operational Impact of Support / PFI Support Contract Variation

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
75 Green
</Td>
<td>
61 Amber
</Td>
<td>the Change in the Sentinel Score is Due to the Astute Class Review Note Being Approved by HMT in July 2011 for Revised Time and Costs for Boats 1-4 and Approved Main Build for Boat 5, Initial Build for Boat 6 and Long Lead Items for Boat 7.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>the Provision of the Platform and Equipment/Systems to Meet the User Requirement.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>delivery of Trained Submarine Crew and Support Personnel, by the Enduring Provision of Sufficient and Suitable Facilities, Training Media and Instructors.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>capability Being Sustained in Order that Astute Class can Meet Allocated Military Tasks in Peacetime, Conduct a Transition to War and Operate Effectively in Time of Conflict.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>how Astute Class will Operate and Interface with Naval Real Estate Such as Dockyards, Ammunition Facilities, Pilots and Ranges.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>the Provision of Trained People. Acceptance of the Manning Solution will be a Staged Process.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>expression of the Principles by which Military Forces Guide their Actions and is a Codification of How Activity is Conducted Today.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>the Forces Structures Component of Military Capability for Astute is Measured Against the Number of Vessels in the Class and their Readiness State Against the Requirement of the Royal Naval Plan</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>the Provision of a Coherent Development of Data, Information and Knowledge Requirements for Capabilities and all Processes Designed to Gather and Handle Data.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (1)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (1)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>it is Now Assessed that the Training Capability for Boats 1-3 will be Met. in the Past 12 Months a Recovery Plan Has Been Instigated to Address the Shortfalls Reported in March 2010. This Action is Now Making Significant Progress Such that it is Now Expected that the Requirement will be Met.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>equipment is Considered to be at Risk. the Technical Challenge of Commissioning the Capability is Beginning to Affect the Schedule for the Delivery of the Entire Astute Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>organisation</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>the Department's Equipment Procurement Plan Balancing Measures in the 2009, 2010, and 2011 Planning Rounds Have Deferred the Delivery of the 7 Astute Class Boats Such that the Planned Readiness as Required by the Naval Plan Cannot be Met.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>training is at Risk Due to the Extent of Boat Design Changes and the Potential Impact of These Changes to Astute Class Training Service. Mitigation is that Astute Class Training Course Delivery Has Been Prioritised to Meet the Known Requirement and Essential Safety Training Updates are Being Optimised with the Training Delivery.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>logistics No Longer Considered at Risk. Boat Programme Slippage Has Allowed Logistics to Catch Up.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>risk Remains to the Support Solution During the Transition Phase from Manufacture into Service and in Providing the Initial Provision of Spares to the First of Class.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Astute Boats 1-3

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1 to 7</Td>
<td>weapon System Effectiveness</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1 to 7</Td>
<td>sonar Performance</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>1,3</Td>
<td>hull Strength (Survivability)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1,2,3,5</Td>
<td>
Top Speed
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>1,3</Td>
<td>
Endurance
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>1,2,3,4,5,8</Td>
<td>
Acoustic Signature
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>3,5</Td>
<td>complement</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>land Attack Capability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>capability Dependencies</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (1)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (1)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>capability Dependencies</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>limited Suitably Qualified and Experienced Personnel Available to Commission the Support Facilities.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>top Speed</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>to Date Initial Trials in Boat 1 Have Been Deliberately Constrained but Unrestricted Trials will be Conducted Prior to Operational Handover.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.3.2 Astute Boat 4

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1,2,4,5,6,7,8</Td>
<td>
Intelligence and Surveillance
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1,2,3,4,5,8</Td>
<td>
Interoperability
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>1,2,3,4,5,6,8</Td>
<td>
Sustained Global Reach
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>theatre Mobility</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>mission Flexibility</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>
Force and Power Projection
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>
Battlespace Dominance
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>1,2,3,5,8</Td>
<td>
Survivability
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>1 to 5</Td>
<td>
Generation
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>1,3,8</Td>
<td>
Through Life Adaptability
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Current Forecast (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>10 (3)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>10 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>intelligence and Surveillance</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>communication and Radar Integrated Solution are Now Funded and in the Boat 4 Baseline.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>intelligence and Surveillance</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical Challenges with Installing

Communication and Radar Electronic

Support Measures (CESM and RESM) Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>interoperability Battlespace Dominance Survivability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>since Last Years Report, Funding Has Been Provided for the Spearfish

Upgrade. Funding Approval from HM

Treasury for both the Naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal and Astute Capability Sustainment Programme Projects Remain Outstanding.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>interoperability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>three Complementary Projects (Naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal, Spearfish Upgrade and Astute Capability Sustainment Programme) are Still Awaiting HM

Treasury Approval to Proceed Placing 3 Astute Boat 4 Key Performance Measure at Risk.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>battlespace Dominance</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>three Complementary Projects (Naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal, Spearfish Upgrade and Astute Capability Sustainment Programme) are Still Awaiting HM Treasury Approval to Proceed Placing 3 Astute Boat 4 Key Performance Measures at Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>survivability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>three Complementary Projects (Naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal, Spearfish Upgrade and Astute Capability Sustainment Programme) are Still Awaiting HM Treasury Approval to Proceed Placing 3 Astute Boat 4 Key Performance Measures at Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2,7,8</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>without Resolution There Could be Reduced Operational Effectiveness, Employability and Survivability Against more Capable Threats.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3.3 Astute Boat 5

### D.3.3.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1,2,4,5,6,7,8</Td>
<td>
Intelligence and Surveillance
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1,2,3,4,5,8</Td>
<td>
Interoperability
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>1,2,3,4,5,6,8</Td>
<td>
Sustained Global Reach
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>theatre Mobility</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>mission Flexibility</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>
Force and Power Projection
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>1 to 8</Td>
<td>
Battlespace Dominance
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>1,2,3,5,8</Td>
<td>
Survivability
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>1 to 5</Td>
<td>
Generation
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>1,3,8</Td>
<td>
Through Life Adaptability
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Current Forecast (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>10 (3)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.3.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>interoperability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal Approved by HM Treasury (December 2011), Astute Capability Sustainment Programme Still Awaiting HM Treasury Approval to Proceed, However Even Though some Elements are Being

Pursued Separately, Three Astute Boat

4 Key Performance Measures Still Remain at Risk for Boat 5.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>battlespace Dominance</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal Approved by HM Treasury (December 2011), Astute Capability Sustainment Programme Still Awaiting HM Treasury Approval to Proceed, However Even Though some Elements are Being

Pursued Separately, Three Astute Boat

4 Key Performance Measures Still Remain at Risk for Boat 5.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>survivability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>naval Extremely/Super High Frequency Satcom Terminal Approved by HM Treasury (December 2011), Astute Capability Sustainment Programme Still Awaiting HM Treasury Approval to Proceed, However Even Though some Elements are Being

Pursued Separately, Three Astute Boat

4 Key Performance Measures Still Remain at Risk for Boat 5.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.3.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2,7,8</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>without Resolution There Could be Reduced Operational Effectiveness, Employability and Survivability Against more Capable Threats.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
