---
Year: 2007.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate
Project: BEYOND VISUAL RANGE AIR to AIR MISSILE (BVRAAM)
Page_from: 27.0
Page_to: 34.0
Project_label: Beyond Visual Range Air to Air Missile
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2007_27_34.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

BEYOND VISUAL RANGE

AIR to AIR MISSILE

(BVRAAM)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

BEYOND VISUAL RANGE AIR-to-AIR MISSILE

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Theatre Airspace)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the PROJECT

## 1a. Project Description, Progress and Key Future Events

The Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (BVRAAM) (also Known as Meteor) will Provide Typhoon with the Capability to Combat Projected Air-to-Air Threats and Sustain Air Superiority Throughout the Life of the Aircraft. Until Meteor Enters Service, Typhoon will be Armed with the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile (AMRAAM), Contracted to Raytheon Missile Systems.

Key Features of the BVRAAM Requirement Include Stealthy Launch, Enhanced Kinematics (Giving Increased Stand-Off and Disengagement Ranges, a Better Ability to Chase and Destroy Highly Agile Manoeuvring Targets) and Robust Performance Against Countermeasures.

This is a Collaborative Programme With: Germany, Spain and Italy (for Typhoon), Sweden (for Gripen) and France (for Rafale). the Contract for the Demonstration, Manufacture and Support of Meteor Was Placed with MBDA UK Ltd on 23 December 2002. Only the United Kingdom Has Committed to Production; the Contract Includes Production Options that can be Exercised by Partner Nations During the Demonstration Programme. Following the Completion of Air Launched Demonstration Firings During Summer 2006, and Associated Data Gathering Trials, Evidence Has Been Submitted for the Successful Achievement of all Four Key Milestones. Following Delays in the Commencement of Typhoon Integration Activities, Tornado F3 will be Employed as the Trials Platform for Continuing Meteor Development with Typhoon Integration Proceeding as the Missile Development Becomes more Mature.

## 1b. Associated Projects

| Critical to Achievement of ISD  |              | Critical to Initial Gate Requirement |              |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Project Title                       | Forecast ISD | Project Title                            | Forecast ISD |
| Typhoon Future Capability Programme | 2011         | \-                                       | \-           |

## 1c. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>contractor(s)</Th>
<th>contract Scope</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>mbda UK Ltd (Meteor)</Td>
<td>
Demonstration (all 6 Nations) and

Manufacture (United Kingdom Only at Present)</Td>
<td>firm Price Up to June 2007 (Demonstration), Firm Price Up to June 2006 (Manufacture), Fixed Price Thereafter Subject to Variation of Price</Td>
<td>international Competition</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>raytheon Missile Systems (AMRAAM)</Td>
<td>manufacture to InService</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>non-Competitive</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance Against Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
1168
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
1362
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-194
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
-36
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Reasons for Variation from Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2007</Td>
<td>-36</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>in Consultation with the Customer the Decision Has Been Taken to Examine Capability Trade-Offs While Realignment and Integration Proposals are Being Matured and Assessed Against the Requirement (-£36m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+27</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>change in Euro Exchange Rate on Meteor Prime (+£29m). Change in Dollar Exchange Rate on AMRAAM (-£11m). Revaluation of Foreign Currency Assumptions on Current and Future AMRAAM Contracts (+£9m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</Td>
<td>united Kingdom (UK) Share of Additional Common Requirement (+£2m), Additional Requirement for Dual Date Link (+£6m), Additional Containers Required for Meteor (+£2m), Refurbishment of Existing AMRAAMs (-£16m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-36</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>effect of Equipment Planning 05 Options: Reduce Meteor Numbers (-£55m), Decision Taken not to Upgrade AMRAAM 120bs (-£65m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>re-Costing of United Kingdom Technical Support Requirements in Addition to Memorandum of Understanding Commitments (+£3m). Re-Costing of Meteor Integration (-£1m). Increases for Insensitive Munitions (+£9m). Missiles &amp; Ancillary Equipment in Support of Typhoon Integration (+£6m). Surveillance &amp; Life Extension (+£5m). Initial Spares (+£3m). Container Development (+£1m). Container Production (+£1m). Support to Typhoon Integration (+£2m). Revised Deliveries of Meteor Missiles (+£12m). Container Logistics Support for Meteor (+£7m). Production Investment (+£1m). Trial Ranger (+£11m). Increase in Unit Production Cost for AMRAAM Missiles (MPR03 +£25m; MPR04 +£15m). Surveillance Spares for AMRAAM (+£1m). United Kingdom Share of Government Furnished Equipment (GFE) (+£6m). Decrease for Service Evaluation Trials for Meteor (-£7m). Integration of Meteor Onto Typhoon (-£9m), Production of Meteor Telemetred Operational Missiles (-£1m), in Service Reliability Demonstration Support (-£3m). Meteor Technical Support (-£2m). Minor Miscellaneous Meteor Items (-£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>change in Assumption in Regard to Recovery of VAT (+£9m), Derivation of Approved Cost on Resource Basis (-£4m), Difference in Variation Due to Revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£11m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-16</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>uk’s Share of MBDA Revalidation of Prices Caused by Delay in Contract Placement (+£6m). Revalidation to Reflect Prices Within AMRAAM Contract (-£14m), and Effect of Revalidation on Cost of Capital Charge (-£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</Td>
<td>revaluation of UK’s Share of GFE/Government Furnished Facilities Requirements (-£20m). Additional Funding Required for Integration of AMRAAM AIM</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date</Td>
<td>variation (£m)</Td>
<td>factor</Td>
<td>explanation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>120c Onto Typhoon (+£82m). Gripen Trial (+£2m). Realism Measure on Funding for Integration of AMRAAM AIM 120c Onto Typhoon (-£65m). Decrease in UK’s Share of Development (-£30m). Increase of UK’s Share of Development Through Transfer of Work Share from Germany (+£31m) and UK Share of GFE (+£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-122</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptance (90%) Estimates at Main Gate (-£129m), Variation Due to Revised Approval Figures (+£7m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-194</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</Th>
<th>
370
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of Peak Procurement Expenditure</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2009/2010
</Td>
<td>
2012/2013
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2e. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">unit Production Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>current</Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Current
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>1.0</Td>
<td>1.1</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

UPC Covers Meteor Missile Only.

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 78%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
ISD Definition:
</Th>
<th>achievement of an Operational Capability with  Missiles and Supporting Infrastructure.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3b. Performance Against Approved in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast ISD</Td>
<td>
August 2013
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
August 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation (Months)</Td>
<td>
+12
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3c. Reasons for Variation from Approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+15</Td>
<td>change in Associated Project</Td>
<td>
Typhoon Integration Delays Cannot

Be Absorbed and Uncertainty over Typhoon Future Capability Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>
Slippage Caused by Delays in Placing Contract (+11 Months). Reassessment of Opportunities Arising from Meteor Realignment Activities, to Reduce the Duration of Firing Trial Campaigns and to De-Risk Transition from Demonstration to Production Phases (-3 Months).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>
Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest (90%) Estimates Approved at Main Gate (-11 Months).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3d. Cost Resulting from ISD Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>type of Cost/Saving</Th>
<th>cost £m</Th>
<th>saving £m</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

ISD Shown is Meteor Only.

## 3e. Operational Impact of ISD Variation

Extend Reliance on the Current AIM-120 Advanced Medium Range Air to Air Missile (AMRAAM). AMRAAM Capability Falls Significantly Below that of Meteor and Was Planned as a Temporary Solution, Providing Typhoon Anti-Air Capability for the Period Between Typhoon Operational Employment Date and Meteor ISD. Whilst the ISD Delay is not Expected to Affect Peacetime Policing of Sovereign Airspace, the Survivability and Capability of Typhoon in Almost all Operational Roles will be Compromised. It Should be Noted that a Staged Transfer from AMRAAM to Meteor is Necessary Due to the Latter’s Delivery Profile, and Hence Use of AMRAAM by Typhoon Extends Beyond Meteor ISD. There is Significant Risk that Part of the AMRAAM Stocks will be Unable to Meet the Revised ISD and Hence We may Fall Below the Minimum Acceptable Stockpile Liability, Although this Cannot be Confirmed at Present.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance Against Approved Key User Requirements[^1]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>forecast to be

Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>multiple Target Capability</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</Td>
<td>kill Probability</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</Td>
<td>enhanced Typhoon Survivability</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</Td>
<td>typhoon Compatibility</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</Td>
<td>minimum Air Carriage Life</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</Td>
<td>reliability</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">100 %</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 4b. Reasons for Variation Against Approved Key Requirements

| Date | Key Requirement | Factor | Explanation |
|----------|---------------------|------------|-----------------|
| \-       | \-                  | \-         | \-              |

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP to MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

On 2 October 1995, Minister (Defence Procurement) Gave Approval for the Issue of an Invitation to Tender (ITT) for BVRAAM. the ITT Was Issued on 5 December 1995. Two Bids Were Received; One from a Consortium Led by Matra BAe Dynamics (MBD) UK Ltd, and One from Raytheon Systems Ltd. After Extensive Analysis, it Was Decided that both Bids Contained Areas of Risk that Needed to be Addressed Before a Development and Production Contract Could be Placed. in May 1997, a Project Definition & Risk Reduction (PDRR) Phase Was Approved and Contracts Were Placed on both Bidders for a Period of One Year with Results to be Technically and Operationally Assessed Before a Final Decision Was Made. Both PDRR Contracts Were Let in August 1997 and Revised Bids Were Received in May 1998.

Due to the Complexity of the BVRAAM Assessment, the Need to Accommodate the Requirements of the Prospective Partner Nations and the Need to Go for Best and Final Offers (BAFOs) Primarily as a Result of the French Request to Join the Programme, Main Gate Approval Was not Achieved until May 2000. in His Statement to the House of Commons on 16 May 2000, the Secretary of State Announced that MBD’s Meteor Missile Had Been Selected.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
<th>proportion of Total Estimated Procurement Expenditure</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>actual Cost</Td>
<td>
20
</Td>
<td>
2%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
14
</Td>
<td>
1%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>date of Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
May 2000
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date of Initial Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
October 1995
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>length of Assessment Phase [months]</Td>
<td>
55
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5d. Cost Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Forecast at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
1198
</Td>
<td>
1240
</Td>
<td>
1362
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>expected Envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
1226
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5e. ISD Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>latest Acceptable</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
June 2010
</Td>
<td>
September 2011
</Td>
<td>
August 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability Was Expected to be Available at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
March 2005
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

THIS PAGE is INTENTIONALLY BLANK

[^1]: KURs are Meteor Only.
