---
year: 2010.0
project_type: Post-Main Gate Projects
project: Joint Combat Aircraft
page_from: 120.0
page_to: 130.0
project_label: Joint Combat Aircraft (Lightning II)
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2010_120_130.md
---
Team Responsible

Joint Combat Aircraft Team

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability (Deep Target Attack)

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Capability (Deep Target Attack)

Number of Projects / Increments 2

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Post Main Investment Decision – System Development and Demonstration, Production, Sustainment and Follow on Development

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

Following the 1998 Strategic Defence Review, UK participation in the Concept Demonstration Phase of the programme and significant analysis, the US Joint Strike Fighter was selected to meet the Joint Combat Aircraft requirement for Carrier Strike. A tailored Main Gate demonstration approval was obtained in January 2001 for participation in the System Development and Demonstration phase to the value of
£1,300M, along with £600M for related non-System Development and Demonstration work, leading to signature that month by UK and United States governments of the System Development and Demonstration Memorandum of Understanding. The selection of Lockheed Martin as the Joint Strike Fighter air system prime contractor included a teaming agreement with Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems to collectively form Team Joint Strike Fighter. Two separate and competitive propulsion contracts were awarded to Pratt and Whitney for the F135 engine and General Electric/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team for the F136 engine. Whilst other partners joined the programme at Level 2 and 3 entry arrangements, only United States and UK requirements have driven the System Development and Demonstration baseline solution.

In September 2002 the UK selected the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Joint Strike Fighter variant to meet the requirement. A review of the Joint Strike Fighter Programme and the viability of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design was completed in January 2005. It concluded that a successful programme of weight reduction initiatives and other performance enhancements had restored confidence that the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design should remain the UK’s planning assumption. A further review by the Investment Approvals Board in July 2006 confirmed this decision.

On 12 December 2006 Minister of State for Defence Equipment and Support signed the Production

Sustainment and Follow-on Development Memorandum of Understanding , which was the first of four Main Gates planned for the introduction to Service of Joint Combat Aircraft. In March 2009, approval was given for Phase 2 of the Joint Combat Aircraft incremental strategy, for participation in joint Initial Operational Test & Evaluation with the United States Services. This will allow the UK to fully understand and influence the Joint Strike Fighter programme as it moves into a new phase.

Two Key User Requirements remain at risk:

KUR04 - Mission Performance: In July 2006 the Investment Approvals Board directed that Shipborne Rolling and Vertical Landing should be included in future development of the Joint Combat Aircraft design to mitigate the risk to the Vertical Land Bring Back capability. Ship-borne Rolling Vertical Landing is now being taken forward within the Joint Strike Fighter programme under UK leadership.

KUR03 – Range; Based on modelling and simulation results, the range capability for Joint Strike Fighter Short Take Off and Vertical Landing is approaching the specified target set for UK requirements based on UK Operating scenarios. However, this potential shortfall is based primarily on modelling with very limited experience in actual flight test. Further flight testing is planned to gain an accurate assessment of this potential problem and mitigation actions will be developed accordingly.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

Approval was obtained in November 1996 to enter the Concept Demonstration Phase on the Joint Strike Fighter programme under a Memorandum of Understanding signed in December 1995. The phase began in November 1996 with two competing United States Prime Contractors (Boeing and Lockheed Martin) designing and flying demonstration aircraft on which the selection of the preferred bidder was based. A tailored Main Gate demonstration approval was obtained in January 2001 for participation in the System Development and Demonstration phase. The phase completed in October 2001 with the announcement of Lockheed Martin as the successful bidder. Studies into alternative options to Joint Strike Fighter to meet the requirement were also conducted but were rejected on cost effective grounds. The options were US F/A18E aircraft, French Rafale M, a “navalised” Eurofighter Typhoon and an advanced Harrier.

## A.3. Progress

On 18 March 2009, the UK Secretary of State for Defence announced the approval to purchase three

Short Take Off and Vertical Landing variants of Joint Strike Fighters for Operational Test and Evaluation. The UK placed requirements on the US Department of Defense for the procurement of these aircraft with associated support and training equipment, and the first two aircraft are already on the production line at Lockheed’s factory in Fort Worth, Texas. On the 26 January 2010, Sqn Ldr Steve Long became the first UK military pilot to fly the aircraft when he conducted a test flight at Patuxant River in Maryland, USA. On 18 March 2010 the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing variant demonstrated significant progress in fully meeting capability by successfully completing its first vertical landing at US Naval Air Field Patuxant River. As a result of a recent senior Department of Defense review of the programme several key changes have been implemented including a delay to the completion of the System, Development and Demonstration phase by one year to November 2014. As the UK has a fixed contribution to the System Development and Demonstration phase the UK is protected from any cost increases that this delay has generated. However it is currently unclear how the programme review will impact jet production costs although the main impact is expected to be outside of the current commitment to Operational Test & Evaluation. For MPR10 the latest US Department of Defense estimates have been used to determine Production forecast against approval. The Joint Combat Aircraft Project Team are currently working to a planning assumption that up to 150 jets will be procured. However both this number and the formal setting of an In Service Date are subject to the Strategic Defence and Security Review.

## A.4. Capability Risks

This capability provides the UK with a fifth generation expeditionary air to ground, air to air and

Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition And Reconnaissance capability to satisfy the 1998 Strategic Defence Review requirement for a carrier capable Joint Combat Aircraft. Without this capability the UK will be unable to meet its Combat Air and Carrier Strike requirements and be unable to support ground forces in multi threat environments at a time and place of the Government’s choosing.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
Queen Elizabeth Class (Future Aircraft Carrier)
</td>
<td>
2016 and 2018
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="4">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td colspan="3">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Development &amp; Demonstration</td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin
</td>
<td>
System Development and Demonstration
</td>
<td>
Cost plus award fee, subject to a maximum price.
</td>
<td>
Competitive International collaboration procurement. UK participation through
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Memorandum of Understanding agreement. (Note: the contract is placed by the US Department of Defense with Lockheed Martin.)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production, Sustainment &amp; Follow on Development</td>
<td>Lockheed Martin</td>
<td>Initial Operational Test
&amp; Evaluation Aircraft</td>
<td>Cost plus award fee, subject to a maximum price.</td>
<td>Competitive International collaboration procurement. UK participation through Memorandum of Understanding agreement. (Note: the contract is placed by the US Department of Defense with Lockheed Martin.)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – Not Applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
150
</td>
<td>
144
</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>6.1%</td>
<td>5.9%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>
150
</td>
<td>
144
</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>6.1%</td>
<td>5.9%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>System Development &amp; Demonstration</td>
<td>
1971
</td>
<td>
2034
</td>
<td>
2236
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production, Sustainment &amp; Follow on Development</td>
<td>
504
</td>
<td>
638
</td>
<td>
638
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 46%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th>Actual /
Forecast cost (£m)</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>In-Year

Variation

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>System Development &amp; Demonstration</td>
<td>2236</td>
<td>1827</td>
<td>-409</td>
<td>+14</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production, Sustainment &amp; Follow on Development</td>
<td>638</td>
<td>621</td>
<td>-17</td>
<td>-17</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>2874</td>
<td>2448</td>
<td>-426</td>
<td>-3</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation against approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. System Development & Demonstration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>
+37
</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>
MPR2010 In year 2009/10 Exchange Rate variance (+£12m). Exchange rate variance 2010/11 to 2013/14 (+£25m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td>
-23
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Cost reductions and re-profiling of UK National requirements (-£15m), correction of effect of System Development &amp; Demonstration Contribution non-financial contributions (+£1m), revision of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation contribution (-£2m), reduced forecast for Ship-borne Rolling Vertical Landing risk mitigation (£5m), Cost of Capital variance (£2m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-100</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>
MPR2009 In year 2008/09 Exchange rate variance (+£4m). Exchange rate variance 2009/10 to 2013/14 (+£2m). MPR08: System Development and Demonstration contribution against MPR07 Versus MPR08 Exchange rate:
2007/08 (-£12m), 2008/09 to 13/14 (-£6m). MPR07:
Exchange rate against profile until 2013 (£11m). Change in dollar/pound exchange rate (MPR06 +£9m;
MPR05
-£181m; MPR04 -£85m; MPR03 -
£9m; MPR02 +£189m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
+253
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
MPR09: In year out turn against forecast – Risk mitigation action leading to minimal level of unforeseen activities emerging (£10m), Ship Borne Rolling Vertical Landing (-£8m) due to overestimate of the work required at this stage of the programme, slippage in the integration of JCA with the Future Aircraft Carriers (-
£6m) due to slower than anticipated progress, correction of in year System Development &amp; Demonstration Contribution (+£2m). Re-profiling of future years comprising of Ship Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing –
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>reassessment of the funding required to return the aircraft with a higher payload (-£1m), updated assessment of the expected implementation work supporting the Autonomic Logistics Information System – a global system for all maintenance and spares for Joint Strike Fighter (-£2m). An increase due to Joint Safe Escape – the ability to deploy weapons safely (+£1m) which was not previously explicitly forecast, refinement of Risk mitigation funding for future years (-£4m), Reduction of Safety Case – a requirement to ensure the aircraft is fit to fly (-£2m) due to the cost to the UK being reduced by the contribution of partner nations. Cost of Capital Charge (+£3m) variance as a result of above (+£3m). MPR08: In year out turn against forecast – including minor changes for 2007/08 (-£14m). UK non System Development and Demonstration National work;
Changes to reflect realism: UK Precision Guided Bomb (-£7m), Carrier Variant Future integration (+£1m) and Operational Test and Evaluation (-£7m). Maturation of risk identified since Equipment Plan 07: Autonomic Logistic Information System (+£5m), Conformity European markings (+£6m), Reassessment of risk (+£6m). Reassessment of Main programme expenditure: Mission Support (+£2m), Reprogramming (+£10m), Bowman (+£4m). Planning Round 08 Option not included in Equipment Plan07 (-£7m). Cost of Capital charge as a result of above realignment (-£5m). MPR07: Re-assessment of UK National Work -
attributable cost which include: UK integration costs: (-£94m), Block 3 weapons adjusted to reflect the latest costing from Prime contractor (+£7m), Safety Case now defined to prepare for contract placement in 2007/08 (+£11m) and re-assessment of risk provision (-£87m). Break out from reassessment from risk provision above which are: UK basing integration &amp; testing (+£5m), Identification of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation costs (+£26m). Outturn for 2006/07 versus Forecast (£6m). Increase in Cost of Capital Charge resulting from change of</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>planning assumption on delivery of Intangible assets (+£48m). Adjustment for realism in the cost of the UK non- System Development and Demonstration work resulting from a deeper review of the estimates originally provided by the US (+£43m). Fewer UK studies than originally planned (MPR02 -£1m; MPR03 (£6m). Costs benefits gained from use of existing Advance Short Range Air to Air Missile stocks for Joint Combat Aircraft trials (-£6m). Fewer weapon studies undertaken in year (-£1m). Improved project support strategy (-£3m). Better understanding of the integrated nature and requirements of the aircraft systems (+£384m). MPR06: Re-profile of UK National Work to mitigate increase in Exchange Rate. Main Drivers are Interoperability (-£1m), Capital Studies (-£1m), UK Integrated Helmet Mounted Display System (-£1m) and Carrier Vessel Future Integration (-£3m). Reprofile of later years Follow on Development (-£3m).MPR05:
Reassessment of Dstl &amp; QinetiQ tasking (-£10m). Correction of contingency estimates due to weight risks in MPR04 (-£15m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>MPR07: The Integrated Project Team conducted a review of the project work schedule which has given the team sufficient certainty to include more accurate accruals for the duration of the project (£10m). Accounting Adjustment made in MPR06 now reflected in re-profiling of programme (-£2m). Interest on capital correction (MPR02 +£46m; MPR03 -£12m). New Defence Procurement Agency requirement to include Price Forecasting Group costs within the equipment plan (+£1m). Additional interest on capital from new Defence Procurement Agency IT accrual methodology (+£1m). Accounting reclassification of feasibility studies (-£2m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£16m). MPR06: Change of accounting treatment for System Development and Demonstration contributions. (+£19m) re-profile of 2005/06 accrual into later years. (-£18m) removal of 2005/06 accrual.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Reconciliation of accrual (+£1m). MPR05: Re profiling of UK specific tasks (+£3m). Adjustment of treatment of Cost of Capital Charges calculation (+£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-499</td>
<td>Changed Capability Requirements</td>
<td>MPR06: Reviews of the external missile systems for Joint Combat Aircraft resulted in the removal of the requirement for integrating internally mounted Brimstone (-£41m), Paveway II and III (-£1m) capabilities and some internal configurations of the Advanced Short Range Air-to-Air Missile (£49m). Further UK participation in the Joint Integrated Test Force to reflect UK acceptance into service strategy (+£20m). MPR05: Provision for Alternate Helmet Mounted Display System removed (-£40m). Reassessment of 2004/05 forecast expenditure (-£12m). Review of miscellaneous requirement including Exchange of Letters Risk Provision (-£40m), design of UK Specific Support (-
£3m), Environmental Protection (-£3m) and Autonomic Logistic Information System interoperability (-£6m). Block IV weapons as a result of JSF programme realignment (-£368m) and associated increase Cost of Capital charge (+£44m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+113</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>MPR07: Re-alignment of programme now included in Development - Ship-borne Rolling and Vertical Landing (+£55m). MPR05: Reduction of Risk line as a result of programme delays (-£29m). MPR 04: Re-examination of risk within the overall programme. (+£87m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-202</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the approved figures at Main Gate (£213m). Variation due to revised approval figures (+£11m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-409</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.1.2. Production, Sustainment & Follow-on-Development Date Variation (£m) Factor Reason for Variation

Foreign MPR2010: Exchange Rate

March 2010 +31

Exchange variation (+£31m).

Cost of Capital (-£15m), correction

Budgetary of Composite Share Ratio (UK

March 2010 -£18

Factors contribution to shared partner costs) from MPR09 (-£3m).

Improved understanding of

Procurement production cost data related

March 2010 -£30

Processes specifically to Operational Test & Evaluation aircraft (-£30m).

Net Variation -17

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 67%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
Nil
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.4. Unit production cost

The Joint Combat Aircraft Project Team are currently working to a planning assumption that up to 150 jets will be procured. However, this number is subject to the Strategic Defence and Security Review.

## B.5. Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to date

System Development & Demonstration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Previous expenditure to 31 March 2009</th>
<th>In-year expenditure</th>
<th>Total expenditure to 31 March 2010</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase (£m)</td>
<td>144</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>144</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</td>
<td>1,313</td>
<td>188</td>
<td>1,501</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure (£m)</td>
<td>1,457</td>
<td>188</td>
<td>1,645</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
January 2001
</td>
<td>- 2</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability –
not applicable^15^

## C.3. In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
Initial Operating Capability - 6 embarked aircraft at Readiness Level 2 (2-5 days notice to move) – to align with the US acquisition framework
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

^15^ The In Service Date approval will be sought as part of the incremental Production Approval strategy.

^2^ Rather than passing an Initial Gate, JCA has used a tailored Main Gate strategy.

|     | and definitions. |
|-----|------------------|

### C.3.2. Progress against approved Dates – not applicable

### C.3.3. Timescale variation – not applicable

### C.3.4. Other costs resulting from Timescale variation – not applicable

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability variation – not applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
Yet to be defined.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.4.2. Progress Report – not applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

### D.1.1. Joint Combat Aircraft

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Maturity Area</th>
<th>Maturity Scale</th>
<th>Last Years Assessment</th>
<th>Current Assessment</th>
<th>Comments</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Commercial</td>
<td rowspan="3"></td>
<td colspan="3" rowspan="3">
<em>Measures under development</em>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Financial</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Project Management</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System Readiness</td>
<td></td>
<td>5/6</td>
<td>5/6</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Technology Readiness</td>
<td>1-9</td>
<td>6/7</td>
<td>6/7</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.2. Performance against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 3%" />
<col style="width: 1%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="5">
Not required for pre-Main Investment Decision Projects
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" rowspan="2"></td>
<td rowspan="2">
Line of

Development</td>
<td rowspan="2">
Description
</td>
<td colspan="3">
Forecast
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
To be met
</td>
<td>
At Risk
</td>
<td>
Not to be met
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
1
</td>
<td>
Equipment
</td>
<td>
36 Force Elements @ Readiness
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
2
</td>
<td>
Training
</td>
<td>
Sufficient trained and available personnel
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
3
</td>
<td>
Logistics
</td>
<td>
Successful integration of Joint Strike Fighter support solution into UK and Joint Supply Chain
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
4
</td>
<td>
Infrastructure
</td>
<td>
Completion of Main Operating Base Lossiemouth
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
5
</td>
<td>
Personnel
</td>
<td>
Sufficient suitable personnel available for training and support
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
6
</td>
<td>
Doctrine
</td>
<td>
Doctrine in place
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
7
</td>
<td>
Organisation
</td>
<td>
Suitable command structures in place to support US based Initial Operational Test and Evaluation and Operational Conversion Unit, as well as UK Main Operating Base, Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and Forward Operating Base operations.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
8
</td>
<td>
Information
</td>
<td>
Integration of JCA into UK Ground Information Infrastructure.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td colspan="3">
100%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="3">In-Year Change</td>
<td colspan="3">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Line of Development</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
Logistics
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Insufficient Maritime Intra-Theatre Lift to support Joint Combat Aircraft aboard Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>Information</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
UK Ground Information Infrastructure may be unable to support the requirements of Joint Combat Aircraft Information Systems
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Performance against Key Performance Measures

### D.2.2. Joint Combat Aircraft

### D.2.2.1. Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
KPM
</th>
<th rowspan="2">
LOD
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th></th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>To be met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Survivability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Interoperability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Combat Radius
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Mission Performance
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Mission reliability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Logistic footprint
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Sortie Generation
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td>100%</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.2.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Measure</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 10</td>
<td>KPM 03</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Based on modelling and simulation results, the range capability for JSF STOVL is approaching the specified target set for UK requirements based on UK Operating scenarios. However, this potential shortfall is based primarily on modelling with very limited experience in actual flight test. Further flight testing is planned to gain an accurate assessment of this potential problem and mitigation actions will be developed accordingly.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 10</td>
<td>KPM 06</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>This KUR represents a measure of the amount of support equipment required to allow JCA to be deployed on operations. As the JSF system design has matured, the amount and design of equipment required for deployment in support of JCA has reduced to</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>below the contractually specified requirement.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KPM 04</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>The Short Take Off element of KUR 04 (based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be changed in the ongoing KUR review, although current projections indicate robust Short Take Off performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight challenges and propulsion system integration issues place the Vertical Landing Bring Back element of KUR 04 at increased risk; the Integrated Project Team has commenced programme action to amend the System Development and Demonstration contract to satisfy a requirement to undertake Shipborne Rolling Vertical Landing.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KPM 06</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Subject to intensive programme action by Prime Contractor. Funded design options that significantly reduce risk have been identified and further changes will be considered in due course.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.2.2.3. Operational Impact of variation

KPM Date Status

Operational impact of variation

Inability to strike some targets at the extreme range capability of

KPM 03 March 10 At Risk aircraft and weapon system.

Severely limits the operational effectiveness of the platform and

KPM 04 March 09 At Risk result in high waste of weapons

Limits the use of JCA within

KPM 06 March 09 At Risk medium scale operations

Total

### D.2.3. Support Contract – not applicable
