---
Year: 2014.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
Page_from: 237.0
Page_to: 245.0
Project_label: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2014_237_245.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Alex Burton
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>september 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

There is a Need to Replace the 13 Ship Type 23 Capability Before the Safe Operating Standard for Legacy Ships is Withdrawn and the Platforms Become Obsolete. Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review it Was Confirmed that this Enduring Requirement will be Delivered by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship.

The Type 26 Global Combat Ship is Planned to be a Globally Deployable and Sustainable Warship that will Form the Spine of the Royal Navy’s Future Fleet. It will be a Task Group Enabled Anti Submarine Warfare Warship and will Combine the Capabilities Necessary to Protect Maritime Task Groups, the Strategic Deterrent and Land Forces, with the Flexibility to Conduct a Wide Range of Other Tasks. Type 26 Global Combat Ship Retains the Combat Power that Had Been Originally Envisaged Within the Future Surface Combatant C1 and C2 Variants, Whilst Enhancing Endurance and Intelligence Gathering Capabilities in a Common, Acoustically Quiet Hull.

\\\ the Current Planning Assumption is to Replace Type 23 under the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Programme, Based on One Class of 13 Ships Delivered in Two Variants; Anti Submarine Warfare and General Purpose Vessels.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the Sustained Surface Combatant Capability Pathfinder Project in 2006 Recommended a Three-Class Solution; C1, a Task-Group Enabled Anti-Submarine Warfare Frigate; C2, a General Purpose Frigate; C3, Providing Mine Countermeasure, Hydrographic and Patrol Capabilities. the Sustained Surface Combatant Capability Project Highlighted a Need for Up to Ten C1s and Eight C2s. Type 26 C1 Was to be Built First at a Rate of One per Year, Followed by C2. This Approach also Met the Needs of Industrial Sustainability Whilst Fulfilling the Royal Navy Requirement. It Was on this Basis that the Concept Phase Progressed to the Initial Gate Approval for Future Surface Combatant (C1) on 18 March 2010. It Was Anticipated that Main Gate Approval Would be Sought by the Middle of the Decade and Estimated that for a Ten Ship Class the Procurement Cost Would be  (Inclusive of VAT and Inflation), with a Whole Life Cost of  (Inclusive of VAT and Inflation), Assuming a Ship Life of 25 Years. It Was also Recognised that There Would be a Strategic Defence and Security Review Following the General Election. Subsequently as Part of the Approval, it Was Planned that There Would be a Midphase Review Point to Assess the Impact of any Changes in Policy Driven by that Review. the Approval from the Investment Approvals Board Capped the “not to Exceed” Value of the Assessment Phase at the 50% Level. All Non-UK New Design and Build Options Were Discounted at the Initial Gate, as Recorded in the Investment Appraisal, Noting the over-Arching Agreement with BAE Systems Maritime – Naval Ships in the Terms of Business Agreement (TOBA) (Dated 21 July 2009). in October 2010 the Strategic Defence and Security Review Reduced the Total Surface Fleet to 19 Frigates and Destroyers which will Include Six Type 45 Destroyers and the Current Type 23 Frigates which will be Replaced by the Newly Renamed Type 26 Global Combat Ship (Previously Future Surface Combatants) after 2020. the Strategic Defence and Security Review also Merged the C1 and C2 Variants into a Single Class of 13 Ships Based on a Common Acoustically Quiet Hull, Eight of which Would be Anti-Submarine Warfare and Five General Purpose Platforms. Subject to Approvals and Value for Money Assessments, Type 26 Global Combat Ships are Expected to be Procured on a Single Source Basis from BAE Systems Maritime - Naval Ships. the Alignment of Renamed Type 26 Global Combat Ship Against the Goals of the Strategic Defence and Security Review Was Confirmed in an Information Note Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in January 2011. This Information Note Stated That:
A. Approval will be Split into Two Parts. Approval (Main Gate 1) will Seek Endorsement of the Requirements to be Delivered by Type 26 Global Combat Ship with Main Gate 2, the Main Investment Decision, Following at the End of the Assessment Phase. This will Allow Detailed Costing and Design Work to Proceed Against a Defined Requirement so that the Project can Present an Affordable Design Proposal for Approval at Main Gate 2 and Subsequent Contract Signing;</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  the Remaining Programme Key Milestones Remain Unchanged, with Planned Service Entry as Soon as Possible after 2020;

2.  Type 26 Global Combat Ship Design is Considered to Have Export Potential with Considerable Effort Being Expended to Encourage Overseas Partner Interest.

The Design and Study Work for the Analysis of Options Stage Concluded in the Capability Decision Point, Held in November 2011. This Identified a Baseline Design from which more Detailed Design Work Continues During the Remainder of the Assessment Phase. the Capability Decision Point Informed the Main Gate 1 Submission which Has Been Endorsed by the MOD Investment Approvals Committee. Main Gate 1 Provided Approval for the Project Team to Continue the Assessment Phase with the Detailed Design Work on the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Capability Architecture, Down Selected on the Basis of the Capability Decision Point Output; and for the Support Solution to Enter Its Assessment Phase.

\\\

The Detailed Design Phase and Industry Engagement Process will Underpin the Programme’s Main Gate 2 at the End of the Assessment Phase, which is Planned to Conclude at the End of 2014, Allowing the Production Phase to Begin Immediately Thereafter . \\\

Maritime Indirect Fires System Has Been Brought under the Programme Umbrella, and Its Main Gate Approval will be Integrated into the Type 26 Main Gate 2 Submission. Maritime Indirect Fires System is an Open Competition Led by the MOD for a Medium Calibre Gun System and which Passed Its Own Initial Gate in September 2012. the Invitation to Negotiate Was Issued in March 2013 to Companies Who Successfully Completed the Pre-Qualification Questionnaire.\\\

In Order to Maximise Type 26 Global Combat Ship Export Potential to Realise Wider Benefits to the MOD, Industry and the UK the Design is Being Developed in Close Partnership with Industry to Improve These Opportunities.

## A.3. in-Year Progress

The MOD Has Engaged in a Series of Negotiations with BAE Systems to Determine the Best Approach to Maintain the Key Industrial Skills Needed to Sustain UK Shipbuilding - The Maritime Composite Option.
\\\

A Review Note Was Submitted in July 2013 when the Project Sought Permission to Extend the Assessment Phase from December 2013 Through to July 2014 and Reported that the December 2012 Affordability Challenge Had Been Reduced from \\\ the Review Note also Sought Approval to Fund some Initial Stage Work to Scope the Proposed Modern Dock Hall which Aims to Deliver an Optimised, Efficient Build at Lower Overall Cost and to Underpin Transformation Within BAES.

The Assessment Phase Extension Was Necessary as a Result of \\\
And the yet to be Concluded Maritime Composite Option Negotiations. Extension Enabled the Design to be Further Matured Ahead of the Main Investment Decision.

At the Defence Security and Equipment International Exhibition in September 2013, BAE Systems Released New Images of the Current Type 26 Global Combat Ship Design and Announced the First 4 Equipment Downselections: Gas Turbines (Rolls Royce) Gearbox (David Brown Gear Systems Ltd), Diesel Generators (MTU) and Integrated Digital Communications Systems (Rohde Schwarz).

Approval to Extend the Assessment Phase Was Granted in Early October 2013 but the Investment Approvals Committee Did not Initially Approve the Funding for the Modern Dock Hall Element Due to the Outstanding Resolution of the Maritime Composite Option Negotiations.

On 6 November 2013, the Secretary of State Announced in Parliament that the Maritime Composite Option Negotiations Had Concluded and Confirmed in His Statement that Three Offshore Patrol Vessels Would be Built for the Royal Navy. the Construction of These Vessels Would Ensure the Key Industrial Skills Were Maintained Between the Conclusion of the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers and the Start of Construction of the First Type 26 Global Combat Ship. as a Result of the Conclusion of the Maritime Composite Option Negotiations, the Approval for the Initial Scoping of a Modern Dock Hall Option Was Subsequently Granted in Late November 2013.

In May 2014 a Further Review Note Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Committee to Extend the Assessment Phase to December 2014 which Stems from the Need for the Department to Achieve the Most Mature Case Practicable Given the Significance of the Investment. This Has Now Been Approved.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Strategic Defence and Security Review Confirmed the Need for Future Force 2020 to Provide Maritime Defence of the UK and Its South Atlantic Overseas Territories. Capabilities Should Include a Surface Fleet of 19 Frigates and Destroyers Providing Military Flexibility Across a Variety of Operations, Including Six Type 45 Destroyers and the Current Type 23 Frigates. However There is a Need to Replace the Type 23 Surface Combatant Capability Before the Safe Operating Standard for Legacy Ships is Withdrawn and the Platforms Become Obsolete.

\\\ There is No Scope to Extend the Current Type 23 Platforms Further without Extensive, Currently Unaffordable Modifications. if Further Extension Was Required, the Hull Strength, Stability and Legislative Safety Compliance Would Need to be Addressed by Work that Removes Capability, Does not Reduce the Risk to the Generation of Forces at Readiness and Costs more than a New Build, Incurring Significant Additional Cost for a Limited Time Extension of the Class (Between 1 and 3 Years). Individual Platform Availability at this End of the Reliability Curve is Likely to be Low and with Restricted Endurance (Because of Fuel Liquid Load Restrictions) their Warfighting Utility will be Limited. the Strategic Defence and Security Review Confirmed that as Soon as Possible after 2020 the Type 23 Frigates will be Replaced by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship which will be Designed to be Easily Adapted to Change Roles and Capabilities Depending on the Strategic Circumstances.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date / Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision Project /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project / Increment Name</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="7">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="7">

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">the Project Assessment Phase Approval Covers Funding for Concept and Assessment Phase Support Activities. the Assessment Phase Contract Was Placed Non-Competitively under the BAE Systems Maritime - Naval Ships Terms of Business Agreement. Support Initial Gate which Was Approved as Part of the Main Gate 1 Submission to the Investment Approvals Committee Outlined the Initial Commercial Arrangement to be Placed Following Main Gate 2 Approval. the Current Assumption is that the Initial Commercial Arrangement to be Placed Following Main Gate 2 Approval, will Be:
A. a Pricing Framework Agreed with the Dockyard Partners Within the Surface Ship Support Alliance /
Maritime Support Delivery Framework for Support at the Platform Level Covering Class Output Management, Fleet Time Maintenance and Upkeep Activity. at this Stage some Aspects of the Commercial Agreements will be Based on Pricing Formulae Relating Variations in Performance Targets, Operational and Other Parameters. During the Build of the First of Class, These Arrangements will be Firmed Up so that Planned Maintenance and in Service Activities are Priced as Far as Possible for a Complete Support Cycle. B. Tailored Equipment Support Contracts Appropriate to the Different Equipment Characteristics. the Strategic Support Options of Surface Ship Support Alliance or the Public Sector Comparator will Establish the Means by which Support will be Delivered in an Integrated Way at Whole Ship Level. This Level of Support is Underpinned by Support of the Constituent Equipments and Systems, which will be Delivered</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="7">through Differing Arrangements Depending on a Range of Factors Such as Whether the Equipment is Unique to Type 26 Global Combat Ship, Whether it is Commercial Off the Shelf or Its Original Procurement Route. These Equipment Support Arrangements in Turn Influence the Platform Level Solution. It is the Intent to Seek Contractible Offers for Long Term Support Arrangements Concurrently with Contracting for Initial Procurement to the Extent Practicable. the Aim of the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Project at Initial Gate Was to Provide the Approval Authority with a Cost for all Support Elements at Main Gate 2 as Far as Possible, Based on Contractible Offers from Industry. Work During the Assessment Phase Has Proven that this will not be Achievable in all Areas. the Project Team will Therefore Seek Approval at Main Gate 2 for an Integrated Demonstration, Manufacture and Support Contract with Commitment Sought for Development, Procurement and Delivery of in-Service Support and New to Service Training. This will Comprise a Mixture of Contractual Commitment to BAE, Type 26 Global Combat Ship Amendments to Existing Enterprise Support Arrangements and Development Work for Later Placing of Contracts as the Design and Fleet Wide Support Arrangements Mature. Subsequently, Decisions Around the Support Strategy Have Been Revisited in Early 2014 Following a Comprehensive Review of Surface Ship Support. the Outcomes of that Review are Intended to Form the Basis of Phase 3 of the Surface Ship Support Programme and will Shape in Particular the Approach to the Support of all Complex Warships with Convergence Around a Common Model. the Type 26 Support Solution will Now Develop Within this New Overall Framework. Initial Support for Each Ship until Its Acceptance into the Fleet Will, as is Normal, be Provided as Part of the Build Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">in-Service Support Contract for Type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>bae Systems</Td>
<td>initial Support</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| Project/Increment Name | Approved Cost (£m) | Forecast Cost (£m) | Variation (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Type 26 Global Combat Ship | 158                    | \\\             | \\\         |
| Total (£m)             | 158                | \\\             | \\\         |

The Type 26 Global Combat Ship is Currently in the Assessment Phase with Investigations into the Cost of Delivering the Capability Being Assessed. as Such it Would not be Appropriate at this Time to Disclose the Immature Costs of Type 26.

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name | Lowest Forecast (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Forecast (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Type 26 Global Combat Ship | \\\               | \\\            | \\\                |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost – N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>91</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>173</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>91</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>173</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>forecast Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment

Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – N/a

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

| Current Score | Last Years Score | Scale | Comments |
|-------------------|----------------------|-----------|--------------|
| 4                 | 4                    | 1-10  |              |

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD) – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM) – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a

Concept Phase Projects 237
