---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Spearfish Upgrade
Page_from: 379.0
Page_to: 384.0
Project_label: Spearfish Upgrade
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_379_384.md
---
FALSE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 68%" />
<col Style="Width: 31%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Spearfish Upgrade
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Weapons- Torpedoes, Tomahawk and Harpoon Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>
Date Appointed
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Richard Stokes (Deterrent and Under Water Capability)
</Td>
<td>19th June 2012</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects /
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Development Phase Demonstration and Initial Manufacture
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision </Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

SPEARFISH UPGRADE

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Spearfish is the Sole Heavyweight Torpedo in the UK Arsenal and is Carried Aboard Trafalgar and Vanguard Class Submarines. the Weapon Was Introduced into Service in 1994 and is the Only Submarine Launched Weapon for Offensive and Defensive Operations Against Ships and Other Submarines. Spearfish will be Deployed in the Astute Class from 2013 and an Upgraded Spearfish Weapon is the Planning Assumption for Equipping the Future Deterrent.

The Spearfish Upgrade Project is Required to Deliver a Mid-Life Upgrade to Sustain a Credible and Safe Weapon for Future Submarine Operations. the Scope of the Project Includes Digitisation of the Weapon, the Provision of a New Insensitive Munition Warhead to Replace the Current Ageing Warhead, Changes to the Fuel System and the Introduction of a New Communications Link. the Upgrade will Address Obsolescence and also Enable Future Reductions in Through Life Costs.

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

The Spearfish Upgrade Project Was Approved in April 2010. the Approval Allows the Project to Proceed from the Assessment Phase into the Demonstration and Initial Manufacture Phase, Subject to Remaining Within Approved Time and Cost Constraints Together with the Satisfactory Achievement of the Assessment Phase Technology Milestones.

The Assessment Phase Contract Was Placed with BAE Systems Maritime Services (Was BAE Systems

Insyte) in April 2010. the Position of BAE Systems Maritime Services as the Prime Contractor and

Design Authority for Spearfish Meant that They Were Best Placed to Successfully Deliver the Spearfish Upgrade programme.This Four Year Contract is Underpinned by a Technological Maturity Delivery Schedule which will Monitor Progress Against Technology Readiness Levels.

The Assessment Phase will Deliver the Required Technology Readiness Level Through an in-Water Trial Planned to Complete by April 2014.

Early Activity Focused on Establishing the Technical Requirements and Defining the System. Project Management Plans Were Developed and the Schedule Baseline Was Established Against which Progress Could be Measured. an Independent Review of the Plans and Schedule Was Undertaken in October 2010. This Review Identified a Broad Range of Recommendations which Have Been Acted on to Improve the Project Delivery Programme. Progress Was Formally Monitored on a Quarterly Basis with all Significant Milestones Being Achieved on Time.

SPEARFISH UPGRADE

SPEARFISH UPGRADE

## A.3. in-Year Progress

All Technical Aspects of the Project are Proceeding Satisfactorily. the Warhead Design Achieved the Required Level of Technological Maturity in January 2012 Following Successful Land Based and Underwater Scale Test Firings Undertaken in Germany and the UK Respectively.

The Fibre Optic Dispensing System Evaluation Trials in April 2011 Identified Problems with the Fibre Optic Specification which Necessitated a Change to a more Ruggedised Specification of Fibre. This Element is not on the Critical Path and Remains on Track Within the Overall Programme.

Initial Design Work to Define and Develop the Interface Between the Upgraded Weapon and the Submarine Combat System Was Completed in February 2012. This Work is Now Being Taken Forward in Conjunction with the Submarine Combat System Team in Defence Equipment & Support and BAE Systems.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Spearfish is the Only Submarine Launched Weapon for Offensive and Defensive Operations. if the Spearfish Upgrade Project Did not Proceed then the UK Would be Unable to Sustain a Credible and Safe Torpedo to Support Submarine Operations. This Would Have a Critical Impact on all Current and Future UK Submarines.

## A.5. Associated Projects

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="3">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>development Phase</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Initial Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
Spearfish Upgrade Support Strategy will Use the Existing in-Service Support Contract and any Follow on Support Contract for Spearfish Torpedoes. This is Currently Provided Through a 10 Year Contracting for Availability Contract Placed with BAE Systems Maritime Services in July 2009. This will Embody the Spearfish Upgrade into the Existing Spearfish Weapons and Provide a Seamless Transition of the Upgraded Spearfish Torpedo into Service.

Enter Text Here</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>torpedoes Capability Contract for in-Service Support</Td>
<td>bae Systems Maritime Services</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

SPEARFISH UPGRADE

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>development Phase</Td>
<td>49</Td>
<td>49</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>49</Td>
<td>49</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>development Phase</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>12</Td>
<td>21</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Initial Manufacture</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>23</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Initial Manufacture</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Initial Manufacture</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>development Phase</Td>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>spearfish Upgrade</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>spearfish Upgrade</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation

(+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>spearfish Upgrade</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>technology Readiness Level</Th>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>last Years Score</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Insensitive Munition Warhead
</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>achievement of Technology Readiness Level 7 Has Enabled

Spearfish Upgrade to Commence the

Insensitive Munition Warhead Demonstration Phase</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>torpedo System</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>overall Technology Readiness Level 3 with some Aspects Having Achieved Technology Readiness Level 4 to 9</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development- N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures-N/a
