---
Year: 2007.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Gate
Project: FUTURE STRATEGIC TANKER AIRCRAFT (FSTA)
Page_from: 187.0
Page_to: 188.0
Project_label: Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft (Voyager)
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2007_187_188.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE STRATEGIC

TANKER AIRCRAFT (FSTA)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE STRATEGIC TANKER AIRCRAFT (FSTA)

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Information Superiority)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the REQUIREMENT

The Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft (FSTA) is Planned to Replace the Air to Air Refuelling (AAR) and some Elements of Air Transport (at) Capability Currently Provided by the Royal Air Force’s Fleet of VC10 and TriStar Aircraft. AAR is a Key Military Capability that Provides Force Multiplication and Operational Range Enhancement for Front Line Aircraft Across a Range of Defence Roles and Military Tasks.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-Service Dates and Costs are not Set until Projects Reach the Point in Time when the Main Investment Decision is Made I.e Main Gate Approval. Until this Point all Costs and Dates are Outline Assumptions Solely for Internal Planning Purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

FSTA Was Nominated as a Potential Private Finance Initiative (PFI) Project in 1997. an Assessment Phase, to Confirm Whether PFI Would Offer Best Value for Money, Was Launched Following Initial Gate Approval in December 2000.

The Assessment Phase is Intended to Confirm Industry’s Ability to Meet the Service Requirement, Programme Timescales and Costs. It is also Required to Determine Whether the Inclusion of Air Transport Capability in the Contract will Represent Value for Money and Clarify the Manning and Personnel Implications.

Ministers Announced on 06 June 2007 that it Had Been Decided to Proceed Towards Financial and Contractual Close on the FSTA PFI. the PFI Funding Process is Now Underway.

181

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
37
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
13
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+24
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Explanation of the Need and Boundaries of Current Internal Planning Assumptions for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Latest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability will be Available</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">after a Competition and Several Years of Complex PFI Negotiations, AirTanker Ltd, a Consortium Comprising EADS, Rolls Royce, Cobham, and Thales Were Judged to Offer the Best Prospective PFI Solution. VT Group Joined the Consortium Shortly After. Following Subsequent Resolution of Key Commercial Terms, Secretary of State Announced on 28 February 2005 that AirTanker Ltd Had Been Selected as Preferred Bidder for FSTA. a Final Decision on the PFI Deal for the FSTA Programme can be Made Only when Negotiations are Complete, the Detailed Contract is Agreed, and the Risks to the Programme are Fully Understood. the MoD, in Consultation with the Rest of Government, Hopes to Complete Its Assessment Soon.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2d. Boundaries of Current Internal Cost Assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

182
