---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: ASTUTE CLASS SUBMARINE
page_from: 23.0
page_to: 30.0
project_label: Astute Class Submarines
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_23_30.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

ASTUTE CLASS

SUBMARINE

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

SUBMARINE PRODUCTION

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Directorate Equipment Capability (Under Water Effect)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Director General Submarines

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The Astute Class of Attack Submarines is the replacement for the existing Swiftsure and Trafalgar Classes of nuclear attack submarine. The required capability places greater emphasis on land attack, intelligence gathering and special forces operations. GEC-Marconi (now BAE Systems (Submarine Solutions)) was identified as MoD’s preferred bidder in December 1995. Using the policy of No Acceptable Price No Contract, a Prime Contract was placed in March 1997 for the design, build and in service support of the first three of the Class.

Following BAE Systems’ disclosure during 2002 of significant delay and projected cost overrun on the Astute programme, the Department entered into discussions with the company about arrangements to address those difficulties. An Agreement between the Department and BAE Systems was reached in February 2003 which reduced risk (e.g. by separating the design, development, build and acceptance of the First of Class from the production of the second and third submarines), and placed new incentives on the company to perform. The Department agreed to increase its cash funding for Astute by around £430 million, against an increased contribution by the company of £250 million. The Department’s contribution is primarily in recognition of the greater than expected difficulty in applying Computer Aided Design techniques to UK submarines. An amendment to the Astute contract to enact the Agreement was signed in December 2003 with boat 1 continuing on a revised Target Cost Incentive Fee arrangement with Boats 2 and 3 pending pricing.

Following the submission of a Review Note in 2007, a further £580m increase was agreed noting that while the programme remained on schedule the design had matured requiring more materials. This was coupled with increased inflationary costs and some programme throughput assumptions at the Barrow site not being borne out. All the programme’s anchor milestones have continued to be met and new project management disciplines have been implemented to achieve better planning and performance monitoring. This has included agreeing a Target Cost Incentive Fee with a maximum price for each of Boats 2 and 3.

Astute Hulls 1-3 are progressing through build; the First of Class, ASTUTE, was launched in June 2007 and has commenced commissioning and alongside trials.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Initial Gate Requirement</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>Forecast ISD</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Swiftsure &amp; Trafalgar Class Update Final Phase</td>
<td>2004</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Class Training Service</td>
<td>2007</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>BAE Systems

(Submarine Solutions)

(formerly BAE Systems Electronics Ltd –
Astute Class Project and BAE Systems Astute Class Ltd)</td>
<td>Demonstration to In-Service</td>
<td>Boat One – Target Cost Incentive Fee

Boats Two &amp; Three –
Target Cost Incentive

Fee with Maximum Prices</td>
<td>United Kingdom Competition</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
3806
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
2578
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+1228
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+8
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2008
</td>
<td>
-34
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Re-assessment of overhead rates used in costing (-£36m). Manhour reduction on Prime contract (-£20m). Removal of Risk funding post Boat 3 delivery (-£2m). Expenditure not apportionable to specific elements of the programme due to 2007 budgeting baseline being overstated which has subsequently been corrected</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>(+£25m). Prime increase (+£27m). Non Prime decrease (-£28m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>+34</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Re-costing of Non-Attributable items since MPR07 (i.e those items not included in original approval) (+£28m). Shipbuilders Relief correction (+£6m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>+8</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Variation in Cost of Capital charge due to revised cost and delivery profiles.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-234</td>
<td>Accounting

Adjustments and

Re-definitions</td>
<td>Increase in shipbuilders relief (-£12m). Cost of Capital effect of adding in creditors and accruals estimates for 2007/08 onwards (-£7m). Re-costing of NonAttributable items since MPR06 (Items not included in the original approval) (+£51m). Overall increase in Cost of Capital due to cost growth in CDEL, changed profile and delivery values (+£65m). Shipbuilders Relief (-£58m) and Sunk cost corrections (-£3m) made in project account. Decommissioning and Decontamination costs (-£1m). Reallocation of Pension cost increases since MPR05 (-£5m). Overall reduction in Interest on Capital due to changed delivery profile and values (-£16m). Re-costing of Non-Attributable items since MPR05 (items not included in the original approval) (+£29m). Removal of items wrongly attributed to Astute Approval in previous years (-£11m). Decrease reflects difference between anticipated resource profile at approval and current profile (Equipment Plan 2001) (-£74m). Removal of Astute Class Training Service costs that have been incorrectly included in previous MPRs – training not part of original Astute Main Gate approval (-£62m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£89m). Removal of items wrongly attributed to Astute Approval in previous years (-£41m).</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+257</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>Includes change to fore end design, completion of land attack missile capability and improved tactical data link capability (+£32m). Additional Capability originally part of Astute second buy which has been brought forward into the first buy (+£225m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+39</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>BAE Systems to forego any incentive payments on Boat One (-£13m). Reduction in Warranty to be provided by BAE Systems from three years to one year (-£3m). Planned Contract Amendments (+£55m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+40</td>
<td>Inflation</td>
<td>Variation between anticipated rates for GDP and Variation on Price on contract (sunk costs only) (+£14m). Correction in previous Variation on Price calculation – incorrect split between labour and materials (+£26m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+1118</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Cost of Capital reduction in respect of removal of Sustainability Costs (-£23m). Sustainability costs of maintaining submarine build capability removed (-£204m). Impact on Cost of Capital of Boat Three delivery advance of one year due to compressed sea trials (-£30m). Option E07UW178S – capability reduction to a 7 boat Astute Programme, taken in Equipment Plan 2007 (-£29m). Option E07UW601S – compress Astute class Boats 1-3 sea trials programme, taken in EP07 (-£3m). Cost Growth from Review Year 06 to EP07. Materials (+£164m), Labour (+£68m), GDP (+£65m), Risk (+£50m), Profit (+£7m), Non-
Prime (-£66m), Overhead (-£12m), Shipbuilder Relief (+£58m). Cost growth in provision of some elements of nuclear safety cases (+£17m). Departmental review identified savings opportunities within other elements of nuclear safety cases (-£20m). Increase in cost as a result of the reassessment of risk,</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>specifically, Team Leader challenge in MPR05 (+£123m). Cost increase identified as part of the Integrated Project Team’s internal review in 2005/06 Prime Contract Overheads (+£97m), Prime Contract Materials (+£61m), Prime Contract Labour (+£26m) and unallocated cost growth (+£21m). Changes in throughput assumptions between MPR05 and MPR06 (-£73m). Reduced Requirement for Technology Insertion post MPR05 (CDEL -£17m, cost of capital (-£1m). Prime Contract pricing assumptions and changes to costing (+£19m). Reassessment of risk (+£51m). Reduction of risk on Sonar 2076 programme (-£16m). Re-costing of land attack missile interface &amp;
integration (+£5m). Re-costing of External communications (+£5m). Increase in overall BAE Systems base costs (shipyard and sub contracts) reflecting a reestimate as well as cost of delay (+£571m). Increase in risk provision owing to technical complexity (+£152m). Changed cost reflecting Astute Agreement of February 2003 (+£52m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+1228</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
2777
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2001/2002
</td>
<td>
2005/2006
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>
3
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
ISD Definition:
</th>
<th>Contract Acceptance Schedule Stage 1 (safe operation and start of operational work up)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
May 2009
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
June 2005
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+47
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+6
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>+6</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Effect of recent technical problems assessed a 6 month slip in In-Service date.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+41</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Risk analysis, taking into account opportunities to reduce construction time, predicts a most likely In-Service Date of November 2008 (-1 month). Risk analysis, taking into account opportunities to reduce construction time, predicts a most likely In-Service Date of December 2008 (-1 month). Exceptional difficulties arose with the introduction of a computer aided design system, the availability of trained staff and project management (+43 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+47</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Support costs and current equipment
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>Costs from this delay have been factored and subsumed into the Department’s revised assessment of Force Level Requirements.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Other
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>Costs from this delay have been factored and subsumed into the Department’s revised assessment of Force Level Requirements.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

The Astute delay will result in the delayed introduction of improved capability over current classes; such as improved detection, greater weapon load and increased availability. Since these delays the department has fully considered the plans for Submarine capability in the light of this and many other factors.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
Weapon system effectiveness
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
Sonar performance
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
Hull strength (survivability)
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
Top speed
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
Endurance
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
Acoustic signature
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
Complement
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
Land attack capability
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>
Special forces capability
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Astute Class of submarines is the planned replacement for the Swiftsure and Trafalgar class Submersible Ship Nuclear. In June 1991 (equivalent of Initial Gate) approval was given to proceed with a programme of studies at an estimated cost of £6m (1991/1992 prices) to define the Batch 2 Trafalgar Class Boat (now known as the Astute Class). This programme of studies led to the issue of an Invitation to Tender for the design and build of an initial batch of three Astute Class Submersible Ship Nuclear and a further approval of £2m (1992/1993 prices) for contractor and Defence Research Agency support to MoD during the tendering exercise in 1994. In July 1994, as a result of concerns over the overall affordability of the programme, Minister

(Defence Procurement) and the Treasury approved a further £23.5m (at 1993/1994 prices) for risk reduction studies to be undertaken in parallel with the formal bid phase of the project. To maintain an effective competition, contracts for risk reduction were awarded to both bidders, GEC Marconi and Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd. The successful outcome of these studies led to Equipment Approvals Committee approval (the equivalent of Main Gate) in March 1997 to place a contract for the design, build and initial support of three Astute Class submarines with GEC Marconi, now BAE Systems.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 29                        | 1%                                                        |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 33                        | 1%                                                        |
| Variation                     | -4                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
March 1997
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>2431</td>
<td>2578</td>
<td>2730</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>June 2005</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>December 2001</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
