---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: TYPHOON
page_from: 151.0
page_to: 162.0
project_label: Typhoon
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_151_162.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

TYPHOON

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

TYPHOON

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Theatre Airspace)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Typhoon, formerly known as Eurofighter, is an agile multi-role combat aircraft. Originally designed primarily, but not exclusively, for air superiority the aircraft is also capable of delivering a precision ground attack capability. Typhoon has the flexibility to respond to the uncertain demands of the current strategic environment and is progressively replacing the Tornado F3 and Jaguar aircraft.

The aircraft is being developed, produced and supported in a collaborative project with

Germany, Italy and Spain. The project is managed on behalf of the four partner nations by the NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency. The contract for the first Tranche of 148 aircraft, of which 55 valued at some £2.5bn are for the UK, was signed in September 1998. The contract for the second Tranche comprising 236 aircraft, 89 of which are for the UK, was placed in December 2004. Negotiations are underway with industry and nations on the third Tranche of 236 aircraft (88 for the UK). The estimated current cost of Typhoon was classified in MPR05 and remains so in MPR08, in order to protect the UK’s ability to negotiate for the third Tranche.

Typhoon has been in service with the Royal Air Force for five years and commenced operational duties for the first time in June 2007 when it assumed Quick Reaction Alert responsibility for defence of southern UK airspace (jointly with Tornado F3 on rotation until April 2008). The second operational squadron, No.11 (Fighter) Squadron, formed in March 2007 and deliveries of Tranche 1 aircraft were completed in December 2007. Deployable Air Defence operational status was achieved on 1 January 2008, which enables Typhoon to deploy worldwide on air-to-air missions.

A contract was placed in July 2006 for an initial precision air-to-surface capability on Royal Air Force Typhoons. This will be implemented by mid-2008, in advance of a more comprehensive air-to-surface package through the Typhoon Future Capability Programme for which a contract was signed in March 2007.

The first export customer, Austria, signed a procurement contract in July 2003 which was amended in 2007 (18 aircraft reduced to 15);
deliveries to Austria began in 2007. The agreement for the sale of 72 Typhoon aircraft to Saudi Arabia, with associated support and training programmes, was signed in September 2007. Contract acceptance of aircraft for Saudi Arabia will commence in 2009. Further export prospects have been identified and the Department (in conjunction with the partner nations and industry) is supporting a number of export campaigns.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>
Contract Type
</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Eurofighter GmbH

Airframe consortium comprising: Alenia BAE Systems

EADS(CASA)

EADS(Deutschland)
</td>
<td>Development</td>
<td>Fixed Price for Airframe and equipments and Target Cost Incentive Arrangement for

Aircraft Equipment Integration. Following a breach of the Limit of Contractor Liability provisions the price

elements for Airframe and equipments have been converted to a Limit of Liability cost reimbursement without profit.</td>
<td>Non-competitive but with international subcontract competitive

elements, the value of which amounts to some 30% of the overall value of the Prime Contract.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Eurojet Turbo GmbH

Engine consortium comprising: Avio

(formerly FIAT Avio), ITP, MTU, Rolls Royce
</td>
<td>Development</td>
<td>
Firm Price (Avio, ITP,

MTU) Fixed Price (Rolls-

Royce) for propulsion systems
</td>
<td>Non-competitive but with international subcontract competitive

elements, the value of which amounts to some

10% of overall value of the Prime Contract.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Eurofighter GmbH

Airframe consortium

(see details under development above).</td>
<td>
Production Investment/ Production
</td>
<td>Overall Maximum

Prices for Production Investment and

Production of

Airframes for all 232

UK Aircraft (Fixed prices for production of

1<sup>st</sup> and 2<sup>nd</sup> Tranche Airframe). Fixed Prices for all Production Investment and

Production of Aircraft Equipment.</td>
<td>Non-competitive but with international subcontract competitive elements, the value of

which amounts to some 30% of the overall

value of the Prime Contract.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Contractor(s)</td>
<td>Contract Scope</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Eurojet Turbo GmbH

Engine consortium (see details under

development above).
</td>
<td>
Production Investment/
Production
</td>
<td>Overall Maximum

Prices for Production

Investment and Production of Engines for all 232 UK aircraft.

Firm Price (Avio, ITP, MTU) Fixed Price (Rolls-Royce) for Tranche 1 and Tranche 2 Engine Production Investment and Production.
</td>
<td>Non-competitive but with International sub-
contract competitive

elements, the value of which amounts to some 10% of the overall value of the Prime Contract.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
16671
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Reduced provision for modifications . Reduced quantity of Role Equipment . Cost of Capital resulting from reduced CDEL and accrual profile .</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Development revised cost  as a result of revised assessment of change proposals and risk. Tranche 1 production revised cost a result of refined assessment of retrofit programme and interoperability modifications. Tranche 2 production revised cost as a result of revised assessment of change proposals. Revised assessment of UK contribution to Eurofighter, EuroJet and NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency admin costs  Cost of Capital resulting from changes to CDEL, asset delivery and accrual</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>profiles identified in Planning Round 08, IRDEL .</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td></td>
<td>Inflation</td>
<td>More accurate calculation of inflation based on advice from NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency .</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td></td>
<td>Exchange rate</td>
<td>Revised Euro Rate advised for Planning Round 08 .</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Re-assessment of Tranche 2 estimated cost , Revised assessment of Tranche 2 aircraft production contract , Revised assessment for cost of Tranche 2 engine production contract , Revised provision for future changes to production standards , Revised estimate for retrofitting early Tranche 1 aircraft to final production standard , Revised estimate for the precision air to ground capability , Reduction in value of Role equipment required for multi role Squadrons , Revised assessment of cost of NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency and industry management , Reduction in forecast for cost of release to service support .</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td></td>
<td>Procurement Strategy</td>
<td>Transfer to Future Capability Programme.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Interest on Capital due to revised cost and profiling of cost and deliveries</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Interest on Capital due to reprofiling of consumption and delivery</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Correction of omission of transferred cost in MPR05 calculation</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>
Industry restructuring.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td></td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>Removal of provision for new weapons and Tranche 1 to Tranche 2 retrofit to create separate Typhoon Future Capability project ; subject to approval by Investment Approvals Board . Separation of Tranche 3 ,</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+1506</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Higher than expected Development costs, notably for equipments (+£316m). Obsolescence costs resulting from rapid changes in computer hardware technology (+£33m). Increases in the estimated cost of enhancing the weapons system operational capabilities (+£140m). Additional Cost of Capital Charge plus further price variation due to slippage in the programme (+£610m). Reassessment of the cost of developing aircraft Enhanced Operational Capability and the production of Tranches 2 &amp; 3 aircraft (most notably the reduced scope for savings due to learning curve efficiency gains) (+£320m). Slower than expected technical progress reducing asset balances thereby reducing Cost of Capital Charge (-£45m). 9 Month deferral of beneficial use date (+£132m Cost of Capital Charge).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+290</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>Provision for integration of new weapons and sensors not contained within original approval (includes Conventionally Armed Stand-Off Missile, Advanced Anti-Armour Weapon, Low-Level Laser Guided Bomb, thermal imaging airborne laser designator (+£239m) &amp; the retrofit of Tranche 1 aircraft to Tranche 2 standard (+£117m). Deletion of requirements for gun (-£32m), 1500L fuel tank (-£16m), CRV7 Rocket (-£2m) &amp; Air Launched Anti Radiation Missile (-£21m).</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Conventionally Armed Stand-Off Missile integration assets (+£5m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-13</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Reprofiling of expenditure, reducing asset balances and thereby reducing Cost of Capital Charge (-£5m). Transfers to other budgets (-£8m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-103</td>
<td>Inflation</td>
<td>Changes in inflation assumptions since approval: development (+£205m) and production (-£308m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-114</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>Changes in exchange rate assumptions since approval (-£114m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-52</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Reprofiling and adjustment of anticipated Tranches 2 and 3 Airframe, Equipment and Engine prices (+£103m). Introduction of benefits to be assumed from planned implementation of SMART Procurement processes (-£165m). Reassessment of the cost and timing of integrating new weapons (+£5m). Increased estimates for QinetiQ/Dstl test facilities in support of the development trials programme (+£5m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+413</td>
<td>Procurement Strategy</td>
<td>German withdrawal from certain equipments (+£106m). Reorientation Development Assurance Programme to bridge gap between Development and Production Investment (+£28m); extension of Integrated Logistic Support programme (+£45m); Eurofighter/Eurojet GmbH management costs (+£30m);
contract price increases (+£87m); risk provision (+£117m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+416</td>
<td>Accounting

Adjustments &amp; Re-

definitions</td>
<td>Changes in accounting rules (inclusion of intramural costs) (+£275m ); transfer costs of industrial consortia management activities from production phase to support phase (-£218m); derivation of approved cost on a resource basis (+£202m). Increases in Cost of Capital</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>Variation (£m)</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Charge resulting from changes in accounting treatment of the delivery of assets (+£27m). A redefinition of Beneficial Use of Typhoon has resulted in the Defence Procurement Agency incurring additional 1 year’s Cost of Capital Charge on development expenditure (+£222m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (£-92m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
12293
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2005/2006
</td>
<td>
2006/2007
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>
at Main Gate
</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>69.3<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
<td>
232
</td>
<td>
232
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">The UPC is based on the costs for Tranche 1 and 2 aircraft only. Tranche 3 aircraft will be the subject of a separate negotiation and contract with industry.<a href="fnref1"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 76%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
ISD Definition:
</th>
<th>Date of Delivery of first aircraft to the Royal Air Force</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
June 2003
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
December 1998
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+54
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+32</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Resulting from the application of complex technologies required to enable the equipment to meet the original Staff Requirement (+32 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+22</td>
<td>Procurement Management</td>
<td>Reorientation of the Development phase in response to the changed strategic environment and budgetary pressures of the four nations and delays in signature of the Memoranda of Understanding for the Production and Support phases (+22 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+54</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Support costs of current equipment</td>
<td>
1075
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>Cost of running on Tornado and Jaguar.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Other
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
861
</td>
<td>Estimated support costs for Typhoon not incurred.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Total
</td>
<td>
+214
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Key improvements in capability not realised until revised ISD are: i) Agility and all altitude performance; ii) Autonomous detection, identification and multiple engagement of air to air targets; iii) Human computer interface to reduce operator workload; iv) Multi role capability;
v) Survivability through superior airframe and equipment performance;
vi) Low mean time between failure. The 54 month delay has been mitigated to a small extent by compressing the entry into service period, but the net effect is a delay of 4 years.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
Take off Distance
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
Landing Distance
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
Attributable Failures per 1000 Flying Hours
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
Life (Flying Hours)
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
Sustained Minimum Turn Radii at Sea Level, Max Reheat
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
Maximum speed at sea level
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
Maximum speed at 36,000 ft
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
Acceleration Time at Sea level from 200 knots to Mach 0.9
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>
Instantaneous Turn Rate Sea Level, Max Reheat
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</td>
<td>
Sustained Turn Rate at Mach 0.9 at 5000ft, Max Dry
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
90%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 07</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Industry flight trials to extend the aircraft performance envelope have identified acoustic vibration within the engine intake which is causing the intake to resonate at very high speeds. This has potential long term fatigue implications which are being investigated by Eurofighter GmbH as part of the main development contract.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 02</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Refined modelling carried out to support the 1994 reorientation submission indicated that in the most adverse conditions the specified landing distance would not be achieved – this was accepted by the Equipment Approvals Committee.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Pre-Development, which commenced with the approval of the feasibility study in 1984, comprised a number of activities. Following early concept studies, and various efforts at establishing a collaborative programme, there were two key Typhoon demonstration activities completed by the UK before development: the Experimental Aircraft Programme, an airframe programme primarily aimed at proving the feasibility of the Typhoon unstable flight control concepts, and the XG40 engine demonstrator programme at Rolls Royce. The results of these demonstrators and their associated studies, together with the results of similar work within the other Nations were harmonised in a Definition, Refinement and Risk Reduction phase that ran from the end of 1985 when four Nations signed the initial Memorandum of Understanding, until 1988 when the development contract was signed.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 78                        | 0.4%                                                      |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 87                        | 0.5%                                                      |
| Variation                     | -9                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
November 1987
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
(Legacy Project) Pre SMART
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>16671</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 1998
</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
