---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Scout Specialist Vehicles
Page_from: 145.0
Page_to: 155.0
Project_label: Scout Specialist Vehicles
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_145_155.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Scout Specialist Vehicle (SV)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
SCOUT SV
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Maj Gen Nick Pope
</Td>
<td>31 October 2013 31 October 2016</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects / Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Recce Block 1 Demonstration
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Recce Block 2 Demonstration
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Scout SV will Provide the Mounted Reconnaissance Capability Integral to Army 2020 by Equipping the Army with a Fully Digitised Tracked Armoured Vehicle, Designed as a Manned, all-Weather Persistent, Intelligence Gathering Capability with Built in Growth. Integral to Army 2020 Plans, it Delivers a Base ISTAR (Information Surveillance Target Acquisition and Recognition)-Like Capability from a Globally Deployable Ground Platform to Meet the Demands of Contingent Operations.

Main Gate 2 Was Achieved in August 2014 which Secured a Fleet of 589 Vehicles in Line with the Confirmed Army 2020 Planning Assumptions.

Scout Specialist Vehicle Was Renamed AJAX on 15 September 2015.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

GENERAL: Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicles Entered Its Assessment Phase (Assessment Phase 2) in June 2008. the Approval Covered the Anticipated Specialist Vehicles Fleet Scope, with High Priority Afforded to Scout (Recce Block 1), Given the Pressing Need to Replace Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked). Specialist Vehicles Was Assumed to Consist of Three Recce Blocks Plus Medium Armour and Manoeuvre Support Components, all Mounted on a Common Base Platform. in Broad Terms the Assessment Phase Studies Confirmed that the Common Base Platform Concept Was Viable for all Platforms and also Set the Time, Cost Performance and Risk Envelope for Recce Block 1.

TRADE-OFFS: Assessment Studies Were Used to Derive the Preferred Programme Option and Its Associated Characteristics of Performance (Requirements), Cost, Time and Risk, Ahead of Launching a Competition to Select the Prime Contractor. These Studies Included an Analysis of Potential Solutions Ranging from Off-the-Shelf Platforms, Modified Off-the-Shelf, and New Design, as Well as Studies on Critical Sub-System Choices E.g. Primary Sighting System. Industry Was Engaged Throughout to Ensure Data Used Reflected Market Reality, Whilst Still Keeping Competitive Choices Open. the Military Customer and User Were Engaged Throughout the Process.

ACQUISITION STRATEGY: Assessment Phase 2 also Determined the Most Appropriate Acquisition

Strategy for the Specialist Vehicles. the Product of this Strand Was Subject to a Separate Investment

Approvals Board Approval. This Approval Endorsed the Use of Open International Competition to Select a 'Prime Contractor' to Conduct the Demonstration Phase for Recce Block 1, and Subject to Further Approval Included Progression to Manufacture and Initial in-Service Support, Together with a Common Base Platform for all Specialist Vehicles. Major Enabling Sub-Systems E.g Guided Weapons (Missiles) for Later Recce Blocks Were not Included in the Scope of Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform in Order to Leave Competitive Choice for Later Recce Blocks E.g. Missile Coherence with Team Complex Weapons. an Update to the Acquisition Strategy Was Endorsed in Jan 13. in Line with the Common Base Platform Concept the Protected Mobility Recce Support Vehicle can be Used with Minor Sub-System Changes for the Ambulance, Command and Engineer Recce Roles. Similarly, for the Three Remaining Roles, Further Studies Have Been Contracted to Assess These Requirements.

The Recce Block 1 Element of Assessment Phase 2 Was Conducted in Four Stages, with the Key Findings from Each Stage Captured in a Stage Report. the Final Stage - The Formal Competition and Investment Approvals Board Approval for Demonstration Was Conducted under an Aggressive Timeline with Transition Through Main Gate 1 Achieved Seven Months Ahead of Forecast. in 2010, the Project Was Subject to Reapproval by the New Coalition Government which Delayed Contract Award by Three Months, Due to the Preelection Period.

Assessment Phase 2 Included Risk Reduction Studies and Demonstrators on the Specialist Vehicles Platforms and on High Performance Thermal Imaging Sighting Systems which Were Subsequently Downselected as Part of the Main Competition. the Recce Block 1 Element of the Assessment Phase 2 Concluded with a Major International Competition, which Selected General Dynamics UK Ltd as the Prime Contractor.

## A.3. Project History

MAIN GATE 1 - DEMONSTRATION RECCE BLOCK 1 ONLY: The Outcome of the Specialist Vehicles

Assessment Phase for Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform Was Presented as Evidence for the

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>specialist Vehicles Main Gate 1 Approval for Entry into Demonstration. as Part of this Main Gate 1 Approval, the Office of Government Commerce Conducted a Gateway Review in September 2009, Followed by a Full Major Projects Review Group Examination in December 2009, which Confirmed that Specialist Vehicles Was in a Position to Proceed to Its Planned Demonstration Phase with General Dynamics UK Ltd as the Prime Contractor. Approval Was Re-Endorsed by the New Coalition Government in June 2010. the Contract with General Dynamics UK Ltd Commits to the Demonstration Phase for Recce Block 1 Only, Whilst Taking Contractual Option for Manufacture for Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform Options for Later Blocks and Initial in-Service Support. This Contract Includes Seven Anchor Milestones. Main Gate 1 Did not Set Initial Operating Capability, Full Operating Capability or Total Fleet Requirements, but Merely Noted the Planning Assumptions Associated with These for Service Entry at the Time. There Was also Recognition that the then Forthcoming Strategic Defence and Security Review Could Change Total Fleet Requirements and Assumptions, and These Should not Therefore be Set at Main Gate 1. Planning Round 11 and Strategic Defence and Security Review Savings Options Removed the Medium Armour Element and Reset the Total Vehicle Fleet Numbers Up to , with the Delivery Profile Recast to Aspire to the Emerging Army Restructuring under Strategic Defence and Security Review (Five Multi Role Brigades). Final Size and Shape of the Specialist Vehicles Fleet Was not Set until Main Gate 2 , in  when the First Major Production Investment Decision Was Taken for Recce Block 1 and Special-to-Role Variants (Updating the Previous Recce Block 1 and Recce Block 2 Elements of the Progrmme). the Recce Block 1 Planning Assumption for Service Entry Was also Deferred by Nine Months  to  Due to a Strategic Defence and Security Review Savings Option. the Enduring Need for the Specialist Vehicles Project Was Noted in an Information Note to the Investment Approvals Committee in June 2011. APPROVALS: It Should be Noted that Scout SV Does not Have a Single Main Gate Approval. the Size of the Programme, Together with Previous Lessons Learned in Other Programmes, Determined that a Two Stage Main Gate Approach Should be Used; Main Gate 1 for Entry into Demonstration for Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform Only, with a Second Main Gate (2) for Entry into Production and Initial Support, the Latter Being the Major Investment Decision. Later Approvals (in Effect Sub-Main Gates) will Approve Demonstration and Manufacture of the Remaining Protected Mobility Recce Support Roles and any Future Needs. at Main Gate 2 in September 14, a Third Main Gate for Approval of the Longer Term Support Solution Was Noted. DEMONSTRATION PHASE PROGRESS : Continuing to Build on Progress Made in 2011/12, the Programme Completed Its Initial Milestones Reaching the Entry Review into the Preliminary Design Review. MAIN WEAPONS SELECTION - SCOUT: Approval for the Selection of the 40mm Case Telescope Weapon System Was Given in 2008 to Enable Commonality with the Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme, Thus Taking the Benefit of Common Ammunition and Training. Qualification for the 40mm Case Telescoped Weapon System is Led by the Scout - Specialist Vehicles Team. in 2012-13, the Programme Continued to Make Progress with a Number of Design Maturity Events Including Mine Blast De-Risking, Mobile Test Rig Trials and an Ambulance Role Mock-Up, Culminating in the Achievement of Preliminary Design Review Exit in December 2012 and the First Anchor Milestone. in Parallel, Assessment Studies, Including Representative Mock-Ups, Confirmed that Ambulance, Command and Engineer Recce Roles Could be Delivered by Sub-System Installation on the Protected Mobility Recce Support Vehicle. Assessment Studies Continued on Options for the Remaining Roles of Formation Recce (Overwatch), Joint Fires Command and Ground Base Surveillance Roles, Against the Existing User Requirements, to Determine Whether Incremental Upgrades are Required to Develop their Capability Further Planning Round 12 Made a Number of Assumptions on Fleet Numbers the Follow on Recce Block 2 and 3 Assessment, and the Planning Assumption for Service Entry , Pending Army 2020, Rebasing and Main Gate 2. an Information Note Was Circulated in January 2013 to Provide a General Update with an Expectation that a Further Approval Update Would be Submitted Later in 2013. During 2013-14 the Programme Continued to Make Progress Within the Demonstration Phase, Including Completion of Mobile Test Rig Trials (Extensive Series of Trials, Including Cold Weather, Operational and Tactical Mobility Trials, and an Ease of Maintenance Assessment); Mine Blast Trial; Garaging Facility Build for the Prototypes Was Completed;
Common Base Platform CDR Completed; and Vehicle Numbers Required to Equip Army 2020 Were Confirmed to Inform Main Gate 2.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

An Information Note Was Acknowledged by the Investment Approvals Committee in July 2013. a Further Information Note in April 2014 Provided an Update on the Discussions with General Dynamics UK on MOD Planning Round Intent, Army 2020 Vehicle Numbers and Contractor Progress.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

MAIN GATE 2 - MANUFACTURE PHASE: This Was Achieved in September 2014 Securing a Fleet of 589 Vehicles Broken Down into 9 Different Variants (Including the Special to Role Variants). This Approval also Included the Initial Two Years in-Service Support. Approval for the Longer Term in-Service Support Contract is Planned for Q3 2016 at Main Gate 3, Following an Open Competition.

Demonstration Phase Progress Continues with the Achievement of the Following Milestones:

May 2014: K11A SCOUT Base Platform Critical Design Review

June 2014: K13 Protected Mobility Reconnaissance Support Critical Design Review

October 2014: K17 Equipment Support Roles Critical Design Review

December 2014: K16 SCOUT Critical Design Review

January 2015: K15 Protected Mobility Reconnaissance Support Training Readiness Review

## A.5. Capability Risks

Scout Specialist Vehicle will Replace Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked) which Has Already Been Extended Beyond Its Planned Out of Service Date Through a Series of Modifications and Urgent Operational Requirements. Combat Vehicles Reconnaissance (Tracked) is Restricted by Its Very Small Design Meaning that it Has Reached Its Operational Capacity Against the Army’s Needs. Combat Vehicles Reconnaissance (Tracked) Must be Replaced (by Scout Specialist Vehicle) to Avoid a Long Term Capability Gap Opening Up in Essential Manned Ground Reconnaissance.

## A.6. Associated Projects – N/a

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project / Increment Title</Td>
<td Colspan="3">procurement Route</Td>
<td>approval Status</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 2 (Special to Role) Demonstration</Td>
<td Colspan="3">acquisition Programme with Full and Open Competition</Td>
<td>post-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp;
Special to Role Manufacture</Td>
<td Colspan="3">acquisition Programme with Full and Open Competition</Td>
<td>post-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td Colspan="3">acquisition Programme with Full and Open Competition</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>general Dynamics UK Ltd</Td>
<td>
Demonstration to Manufacture
</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>competitive – International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">the Support Strategy Was Endorsed at Main Gate 2 which Committed to the 2 Years Initial in-Service Support as Part of the Manufacture Phase Contract Amendment; this is for a Two Year Period from the Date that the Initial Operating Capability is Delivered. It is Currently Planned to Negotiate an Incentivised Support Solution During the Demonstration Phase to Come into Effect Following the Initial in-Service Support Phase.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>first Two Years Support</Td>
<td>general Dynamics UK</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>competitive – International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>specialist Vehicles</Td>
<td>109</Td>
<td>83</Td>
<td>26</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>109</Td>
<td>83</Td>
<td>26</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name                                      | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Recce Block 1 & Special to Role Demonstration & Manufacture[^1] | 5351                     | 5480                  | 5616                      |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; Special to Role Demonstration
&amp; Manufacture</Td>
<td>5480</Td>
<td>5480</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>5480</Td>
<td>5480</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>354</Td>
<td>354</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost (in Year) –
N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>75</Td>
<td>00</Td>
<td>
75
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>448</Td>
<td>282</Td>
<td>
730
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>00</Td>
<td>
00
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>524</Td>
<td>282</Td>
<td>
806
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Forecast /
Actual Date of Main Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>specialist Vehicles</Td>
<td>
June 2008
</Td>
<td>
Continuous

Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; Special to Role (Demo &amp; Manufacture)</Td>
<td>
June 2008
</Td>
<td>
August 2014
</Td>
<td>
74
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>
June 2008
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; Special to Role (Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture)</Td>
<td>march 2020</Td>
<td>july 2020</Td>
<td>
December 2020
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; Special to Role (Manufacture)</Td>
<td>
IOC1: An Armoured Cavalry Squadron with Crews Trained to Collective Training (CT) Level 2. Command &amp; Control, and Ambulance Variants will be Provided by Other Platforms. IOC2: An Armoured Cavalry Squadron (Excluding Attached Arms) with Crews Trained to Collective Training (CT) Level 2.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>in Service Date</Td>
<td>july 2020</Td>
<td>january 2020</Td>
<td>-6 Months</Td>
<td>-6 Months</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Recce Block 1 & 2 (Demonstration) STR

Date

Variation

(

/

+

-

Months)

Category

Reason for Variation

March 2015

-6 Months

Technical

Factors

Schedule Change

To

The

Forecast

Date for Initial Operating Capabilit

Y\.

Net Variation

(+

/

-

Months)

-6

Months

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 29%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; Special to Role</Td>
<td>
Draft Definition for FOC is when the 3 Brigades Receiving the Capability Have Completed Conversion Training, and Force Driving Defence Operational Liability (FDDOL) is Complete.
</Td>
<td>
FOC Forecast Improved to June 2025 (50%) from Forecast at Main Gate 2 of December 2025 (50%)
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 80%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
78
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 29%" />
<col Style="Width: 34%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
System Verification (Contract Acceptance Against SRD)
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Personnel Trained for Trials
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
In Service Support Solution Verified (Contract Acceptance in Accordance with ITEAP)
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Infrastructure Solution Demonstrated in Accordance with ITEAP.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Personnel Solution Demonstrated in Accordance with the ITEAP.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Draft Concept of Use (CONUSE) Developed by Concepts &amp; Doctrine (C&amp;D) from Equipment's Initial Baseline Solution (Initial B/L Sol ) and C&amp;D's Concept of Employment (CONEMP), Covering all Funded Platform Variants, with Gaps Between Funded CONUSE and CONEMP Fed Back to Capability's Capability Gap (CG).
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Organisation Solution Demonstrated in Accordance with the ITEAP.
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Information Solution, Including Hardware, Software and Data Messages Required to Satisfy the Information Exchange Requirements, Has Been Successfully Verified Against the Systme Requirements and Design Spceification Through Analysis and Developmental Testing in Synthetic and Real- World Development Environments in Accordance with the Integrated Test, Evaluation &amp;
Acceptance Plan (ITEAP)
</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1. Recce Block 1 Demonstration

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1 Situational Awareness</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Gather and Use Information About the Operational Environment.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 2 Interoperability</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Operate National, and with Multinational, C4I Battlespace Systems</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 3 Deployability</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Deploy Rapidly Worldwide by Land, Sea and Air.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4 Operational Mobility</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Selfdeploy a Total of 530 Km (300 Km by Road, 200 Km on Tracks and 30 Km Cross Country) on a Single Load of Fuel with the Appropriate Number of Personnel and Equipment According to Role, Ready to Complete a Battlefield Mission after Re-Fuelling.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5 Tactical Mobility</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Achieve Levels of Terrain Accessibility and Agility Appropriate to Role.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 6 Lethality
</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Achieve the Defined Levels of Lethality Appropriate to Role.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 7 Survivability</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with the Defined Levels of Survivability Appropriate to Role.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 8 Sustainability</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Sustain Future Rapid Effect System Operational Effectiveness for National and Coalition Operations.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 9 Availability</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Deliver High Levels of Operational Availability, for Durations of 14 Day High Intensity Warfighting Operation, with Minimum Maintenance.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 10 Environment</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Store, Transport and Operate the Capability World-Wide in all Relevant Operational Environments and Terrains.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 11 Growth

Potential</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Develop the Capability of Future Rapid Effect System Through Life, Through the Ready Integration of Emerging Technologies.</Td>
<td>forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
11 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
11 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.3.2. Project/Increment – N/a

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM) – N/a

### D.3.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a

[^1]: MG2 Approval Combined RB1 and STR Demonstration and Manufacture into a Single Approval; this Replaces the MPR14 RB1 Demo, RB2 Demo and RB1&2 Manufacture Lines. RB3 is Progressing as Dismounted Capability Within Variants of the RB1 Vehicles and as Such No Further Manufacture Contract is Expected.
