---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: A400M
Page_from: 10.0
Page_to: 27.0
Project_label: A400M
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_10_27.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
A400M
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
A400M
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore David Lee
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>20 July 2015</Td>
<td>july 2018</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
A400M
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Training Service
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
In Service Support
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

A400M is Planned to Provide Tactical and Strategic Mobility to all Three Services. the Required Capabilities Include: Operations from Airfields and Semi-Prepared Rough Landing Areas in Extreme Climates and all Weather Conditions by Day and Night; Carrying a Variety of Equipment Including Vehicles and Troops over Extended Ranges; Air Dropping Paratroops and Equipment; and Being Unloaded with the Minimum of Ground Handling Equipment. the 1998 Strategic Defence Review Confirmed a Requirement for an Airlift Capability to Move Large Single Items Such as Attack Helicopters and some Royal Engineers' Equipment and Concluded that this Would be Met, in the Latter Part of the First Decade of the 21st Century by Future Transport Aircraft. the A400M Was Selected to Meet this Requirement. It will Replace the Remaining Hercules C-130k Fleet.

A400M is a Collaborative Programme Involving Seven European Nations (Belgium, France, Germany, Luxemburg, Spain, Turkey and United Kingdom). the Design Phase is Nearing Completion and Manufacture Activities Have Commenced. Delivery of the First UK Aircraft to the Royal Air Force Occurred in November 2014.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Government Announced in December 1994 that it Would Replace Its Aging C-130k Hercules Fleet, in Part by Procuring 25 C-130j's from Lockheed Martin and in Addition, Subject to Certain Conditions, by Rejoining the Next Phase of the Collaborative Future Large Aircraft Programme (Now Known as A400M). the Future Large Aircraft 'Initial Gate' Approval Was Achieved in July 1997 and in the Same Year the Solution Assumed for Costing Purposes Was Changed to an Initial Lease of Four C-17 and Subsequent Procurement of 25 Future Large Aircraft. a Request for Proposals Was Issued to Airbus in September 1997 on Behalf of the Seven Future Large Aircraft Nations (Belgium, France Germany, Italy, Spain, Turkey and UK). Subsequently, in July 1998, Four Nations (Belgium, France, Spain and UK) Issued a "Competitive Request for Proposals" for a Future Transport Aircraft to Airbus Military (A400M), Boeing (C-17) and Lockheed Martin (C-130j).

Proposals Were Received on 29 January 1999 and Parallel National and International Assessments Were Undertaken. These Covered Combined Operational Effectiveness and Investment Appraisal, Technical and Commercial Compliance, Risk Assessment, and an Appraisal of the International Dimensions. This Work also Led to Parallel Negotiations and Clarification with the Three Bidders. at the Direction of the Equipment Approvals Committee in December 1999, Additional Work Was Undertaken to Inform the Main Gate Submission. on 16 May 2000 the Government Announced the Decision to Procure 25 A400M Aircraft to Meet the Future Transport Aircraft Requirement.

## A.3. Project History

On 18 May 2000, the Investment Approvals Board Approved the Acquisition of 25 A400M Aircraft with an

In Service Date of December 2009. Following the Submission of a Review Note, on 8 May 2003 the Investment Approvals Board Revised the in Service Date to December 2011 and Defined it as Being the Delivery of the Seventh UK A400M Aircraft. This Change Was Necessary Due to Delays in the German Parliamentary Approvals Process, which Had Prevented Signature of the Multinational Contract; Approval Was Finally Granted on 21 May And, on 27 May 2003, the A400M Development and Production Phase Contract (Including the UK Order for 25 Aircraft) Was Signed by OCCAR on Behalf of the Six Partner Nations.

On 27 May 2006, the Investment Approvals Board Granted Initial Gate Approval and the A400M in Service Support Assessment Phase Commenced.

On 26 June 2008, the First Complete A400M Aircraft Was Rolled Out from the Airbus Military Final Assembly Line Facility in Seville.

On 25 September 2008, Airbus Announced a Delay to the First Flight of the A400M Prototype Aircraft And, on 25 November, Announced that it Could Further Slip until the "Second Half" of 2009. on 27 November, Airbus Military Briefed the A400M Programme Board (the Senior Multinational Governance Body) on Its Progress with Reassessing the Aircraft Delivery Schedule.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>on 17 December 2008, the First Flight of the A400M Flying Test Bed (an Adapted C-130 Aircraft) to Undertake Testing of the Specially Designed TP-400 Turbo Prop Engine Developed for A400M Took Place in Cambridge. on 19 December 2008, Airbus Military Sent a Revised Production Schedule to OCCAR And, on 9 January 2009, Airbus Military Proposed a
"New Approach" to the A400M Programme and Sought Negotiations with Partner Nations. on 12 March 2009, a Meeting of A400M Partner Nation Defence Ministers (at which the UK Was Represented by the Secretary of State) Agreed to a
"Standstill Agreement" with Airbus Military. This Enabled Discussions About Options and Possible Outcomes for the A400M Programme to Take Place Whilst the Rights of all Parties under the Original Contract Were Protected. a Period of Intensive Negotiation, Combined with a Thorough Review of all Aspects of the Programme, then Followed. on 11 December 2009 the First Flight of MSN001 (the First A400M Prototype Aircraft) Took Place in Seville. on 12 March 2010, the Investment Approvals Board Reapproved the UK A400M Programme with a Revised in Service Date of 2015. on 29 March 2010 in a Written Ministerial Statement the Secretary of State Informed Parliament that Agreement Had Been Reached Between A400M Partner Nations and Airbus Military on the Future of the Programme. Heads of Terms Had Been Agreed that Would Form the Basis for the Negotiation of an Amended Contract (Including the Decision to Amend the UK Order from 25 to 22 Aircraft). on 31 March 2010 the Heads of Terms Were Signed on Behalf of Partner Nations by OCCAR with Airbus Military. on 8 April 2010 the First Flight of MSN002 (the Second Prototype Aircraft) Took Place in Seville, Followed on 9 July 2010 by the First Flight of MSN003 (the Third Prototype), also in Seville. on 19 October 2010, the Strategic Defence and Security Review Announcement Stated that A400M Would be a Key Element of the RAF Future Air Transport Fleet. It also Announced the Bringing Forward of the Hercules C-130j Out of Service Date from 2030 to 2022. on 5 November 2010 the Substantive Contract Amendment (which Included Revised Aircraft Production and Delivery Schedules) Was Agreed by Partner Nations' Representatives and Sent for National Staffing and Approval Prior to Signature. the UK Had Already Achieved Re-Approval in March. on 20 December 2010 the First Flight of MSN004 (Fourth Prototype Aircraft) Took Place in Seville. on 7 April 2011, the Amended Development and Production Phase Contract Was Signed by OCCAR (on Behalf of Partner Nations) with Airbus Military. This Included the Revised UK Order of 22 Aircraft. Investigation Work into the Causes of Engine Problems Encountered in June 2011 During Flight Trials Have Concluded and Solutions Have Been Developed. Although this Caused some Disruption to the Flight Trials Programme, this is not Expected to Have any Significant Impact on the Aircraft Production Schedule. the First Flight of MSN006 (the Fifth and Final Prototype Aircraft) Took Place on 20 December 2011 in Seville. Although the A400M is a Military Transport Aircraft, Its Design will be Predominantly Civil Certified with Additional Military Certification as Necessary. Following Evaluation of Evidence Produced by the Multinational Flight Trials Programme, the European Aviation Safety Agency Granted a Restricted Type Certificate to A400M on 30 April 2012. the UK A400M Training Service Achieved Main Gate Approval in July 2012, and it is Now Reported as a Separate Increment to the Main A400M Programme and Measured Against Its Own Main Gate Approval. Consequently the Original Main Gate Approval, Which, in Addition to Aircraft Acquisition Included Elements of Initial Training and Initial in Service Support, No Longer Represents an Accurate Baseline. as a Result, the Constituent Elements of the Original A400M Platform Main Gate Approval (Achieved in 2000) Have Been Separated Out and the A400M “budgeted For”
And “highest Approved” Figures (Section B2 and B3, Respectively) Have Been Adjusted to Reflect this Change. Although the Overall Demonstration and Manufacture Forecast Figure Being Reported in Section B3 Has Come Down, Previously Validated Variations, which Remain Within the Scope of the Original Platform (Aircraft Acquisition) Main Gate Approval will Continue to be Reported Against this Element of the Programme, so that a Consistent Measure of Project Performance Against the Initial Baseline is Maintained. Additionally, in Anticipation of the Achievement of UK A400M in Service Support Main Gate Approval Later this Year, These Elements of the Original Main Gate Approval Have also Been Extracted.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

At the Farnborough International Airshow in July 2012, the Prime Minister Announced that an Order for the First UK A400M Full Flight Simulator Had Been Agreed.

On 4 March 2013, Minister (Defence, Equipment, Support and Technology) Announced that Two Further Contracts Relating to the A400M Programme Had Been Placed. the Training Service Support Contract will Provide a Specialist Training School for Personnel Who will Operate, Support and Maintain the A400M. a Separate Contract for the Development, Manufacture and Installation of Modifications Required to Operate the Large Aircraft Infrared Countermeasures Defensive Aids System when Flying in Hostile Environments Has also Been Let.

Following the Conclusion of all of the Required Flight Trials Activity, the European Aviation Safety Agency Granted a Full Type Certificate to A400M on 13 March 2013.

On 31 July 2013, the Partner Nations Granted Type Acceptance at the Initial Operating Clearance for the

A400M Atlas Aircraft, Paving the Way for the Delivery of the First Aircraft, to France, which Occurred in Early August. Delivery of the Second A400M Atlas, also to France, Took Place in November 2013. These are Important Way Markers in the Multinational Aircraft Production and Delivery Programme, as Was the Retirement from the Flight Trials Programme of the First Prototype Aircraft, MSN001, in Late November. These Significant Events Have Helped Provide Further Evidence of the Capability and Design Maturity of this New Aircraft; in Support of This, the Multinational Flight Trials Programme Had Amassed over 6,000 Flying Hours by the End of March 2014.

On 3 December 2013, the Defence Board Agreed to Exchange Two Aircraft Production Slots with France, Meaning that the UK Would Now Receive Two of Its Order of 22 A400M Atlas Aircraft Earlier than Had Previously Been Planned. Nevertheless, UK Aircraft Deliveries are Still Forecast to Commence in September 2014.

On 30 January 2014, the Investment Approvals Committee Retrospectively Approved the UK Contribution to the Export Levy Facility (Reported in the Major Projects Report 2013) And, Consequently, Increased the Approved Budget for the UK A400M Atlas Aircraft Acquisition Programme by the Same Amount. However, as the Major Projects Report Compares Performance Against the Original Approval, and the Export Levy Facility Was not Within the Scope of that Approval, the “budgeted For” and
“highest Approved” Figures in Section B2 and B3 Did not Change.

The A400M in Service Support Main Gate Business Case Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Committee in February 2014, However, at the End of March 2014 it Was Awaiting Final Endorsement and Approval by Ministers and Her Majesty’s Treasury. as a Consequence, in Service Support Was not Reported.

On 6 November 2013 the Planned Review Note to Include the Cargo Hold Trainer in the Training Service Was Approved. This Increased the Approval for the Training Service by £24m from £502m to £526m And, Consequently, the “approved Cost” Figure (Section B4) Was Revised to Reflect this New Limit. This Device will be Procured Through the A400M Development and Production Phase Contract with Airbus Military under a Contract Amendment Signed on 15 November 2013.

The A400M Schoolhouse at RAF Brize Norton, Being Procured under the A400M Training Service Support Contract with A400M Training Services Limited, Was Completed on Schedule and Accepted Off Contract on 28 March 2014.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

On 4 April 2014, Turkey Took Delivery of Its First Aircraft and Became the Second Partner Nation to Operate the A400M.

On 1 May 2014, the UK A400M in Service Support Main Gate Business Case Was Approved, and this Element of the Programme will Now be Reported as a Separate Increment.

On 7 May 2014 the A400M Schoolhouse Was Officially Opened. the Schoolhouse Training Facility Currently Contains One Full Flight Simulator, One Loadmaster Workstation Trainer, One Cockpit Maintenance Operations Simulator and a Suite of Computer Based Training Equipment.

The First of the Part Task Trainers Ordered, for Movements Personnel, Was Delivered on 28 August 2014.

On 30 August 2014, the First Flight of MSN015 (Designated to Become ZM400, the First RAF A400M Aircraft) Took Place in Seville, an Important Waymarker in the Process Leading to Delivery of this Aircraft.

On 29 September 2014, Following the Successful Conclusion of Negotiations, a Contract to Provide a Support Service for the RAF A400M Fleet Was Signed with Airbus Military Sociedad Limitada. the Service, Based at RAF Brize Norton, Provides all Lines of Aircraft Maintenance and Draws Upon Proven Civil Aviation Practices. It Was Officially Certified by the UK Military Aviation Authority on 16 October 2014, Meaning that it Was Ready to Receive and Support A400M Aircraft.

On 17 November 2014 ZM400, the First UK Aircraft, Arrived at RAF Brize Norton, and Was Flown on Training Sorties on 18 November. This Occasion, when the UK Became the Third Partner Nation to Operate the A400M, Was Officially Marked with a Ceremony at RAF Brize Norton on 27 November 2014. Separately, on 26 November 2014, MSN016 (Designated as ZM401) Left the Airbus Final Assembly Line

Production Facility in Seville and Transferred to the Airbus Facility at Getafe, Madrid, to Undergo Modification Work to Enable the Aircraft to Operate a Defensive Aids Sub System.

On 8 December 2014, Building Upon the Recently Signed in Service Support Contract, and in Furtherance of the Objectives of the 2010 Anglo-French Lancaster House Treaty, the UK and France Signed a Contract for the Provision of Joint Elements for their National in Service Support Contracts.

On 18 December 2014, Germany Became the Fourth Partner Nation to Operate the A400M when it Took Delivery of Its First Aircraft.

On 9 February 2015, at a Ceremony Held at the Airbus Facility at Filton, ZM400 Was Officially Named “city of Bristol”.

On 27 February 2015 ZM402, the Second RAF A400M Aircraft, Arrived at RAF Brize Norton. on the Same Day the Airbus Group Announced Its 2014 Annual Results Accompanied by a Statement Relating to Issues Around the A400M Programme and Announced a “revised Baseline and Delivery Schedule”. Details of the Proposal for a Revised Plan Were Delivered in Early March 2015, and are Being Assessed by Senior Officials from Partner Nations. Ahead of this Announcement, and in Acknowledgement of the Delays that Had Already Occurred to Aircraft Deliveries, the UK Had Revised Its Forecast of Achievement of in Service Date from March to September 2015.

On 10 March 2015, Malaysia Took Delivery of MSN022, and Became the First A400M Export Customer.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Not Proceeding with this Capability Would Significantly Reduce the UK's Tactical Air Transport Capability Due to Having to Rely Solely on C-130j Aircraft to Provide Support to Operations after the C-130k Out of Service Date in 2013. Furthermore, not Proceeding Would Mean that the UK will not Have any Tactical Air Transport Capability after 2022, (the Revised Out of Service Date for the C-130j Declared in the Strategic Defence and Security Review) and less than the Planned for Strategic Lift Capability, as it Would be Dependant Solely on the Current Fleet of Eight C-17 Aircraft.

The Achievement of Type Certificate Has Significantly De-Risked the Programme, and is Another Major Step Towards Achieving a Deliverable Aircraft. Future Capability Risks Include the Ongoing Development of Military Functionality, the Delivery of an Appropriate Support Solution and the Provision of Trained Crews to Match Aircraft Deliveries. These Risks are Well Understood and Work is Ongoing to Undertake Effective Mitigation Activity.

## A.6. Associated Projects – N/a

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>airbus Military Sociedad Limitada (AMSL)</Td>
<td>development,

Production and

Initial in Service Support.</Td>
<td>fixed Price, Subject to Variation of Price (VOP)</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">training the UK A400M Training Service Achieved Main Gate Approval in July 2012 (Augmented by a Planned Review Note in November 2013) and is Now Reported as a Separate Increment. the A400M Training Service Encompasses the Following:
<ol Type="a">
<li>training for Initial Cadre of all User Groups Undertaken at the International Training Centre using The</Li>
</Ol>

A400M Training Courses Offered by AMSL;

<ol Start="2" Type="a">
<li>uk-Specific Courses for all User Groups Developed by Authority Personnel, with some Contractor Support;</Li>
<li>an A400M ‘schoolhouse’ Has Been Established at RAF Brize Norton that will Ultimately Comprise 2 x Full Flight Simulators, 1 x Cargo Hold Trainer - Enhanced, 1 x Load Master WorkStation Trainer, 1 x Cockpit Maintenance Operations Simulator and a Suite of Computer Based Training Equipment.</Li>
<li>three Part Task Trainers Provided at Brize Norton for Use by 3rd User Group (3ug) Personnel;</Li>
<li>aircrew Instruction Provided by Authority Personnel with Limited Support from Contractor Instructors; Maintenance Instruction Provided by Contractor Personnel; 3ug Instruction Provided by Authority Personnel;</Li>
<li>training Equipment and the Schoolhouse Infrastructure are Contractor-Maintained and Supported.</Li>
</Ol>
In-Service Support the UK in Service Support Service Achieved Main Gate Approval in May 2014 and will Now be Reported as a Separate Increment. the Agreed Support Strategy Endorses a Phased Approach, with the Support Service Being Developed in Line with the Aircraft Fleet Build Up, and this Current Approval, for Initial in Service Support, Covers the Period until September 2016. Based at RAF Brize Norton (the UK A400M Main Operating Base), this Contractorled, Output-Based Service Covering all Lines of Aircraft Maintenance. a Single Engineering Organisation and a Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul Organisation (Utilizing a Combination of Contractor Staff and RAF Engineers) will Provide Continuing Airworthiness Management, all Line and Base Maintenance Activities for the Aircraft Plus Maintenance of Certain Components. the Service Combines Elements of Civil Aviation Procedures with the Operational Flexibility Required to Operate a Military Aircraft, and is Regulated by European Aviation Safety Agency and the UK Military Aviation Authority. in Furtherance of the Objectives of the 2010 Lancaster House Treaty, Certain Elements are also Provided Jointly with France. These Parts Provide Savings and Economies of Scale Through Pooled Spares and Shared Common Services and Costs. in Addition, this Approval also Covers Construction of a Bespoke A400M Hangar, which will be a Key Enabler for the Integrated in Service Support Service that Follows on from this Initial Phase. the Hangar is Being Delivered by the Defence Infrastructure Organisation on Behalf of the A400M Project Team.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>training Service</Td>
<td>airbus Military Sociedad Limitada</Td>
<td>development and Production of Training Aids</Td>
<td>fixed Price, Subject to Variation of Price (VOP)</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>training Service</Td>
<td>a400m Training Services Limited</Td>
<td>provision of Infrastructure and Support of Training Aids</Td>
<td>fixed Price, Subject to Variation of Price (VOP)</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Strategy</Td>
<td>airbus Military Sociedad Limitada</Td>
<td>continuing Airworthiness Management; Line and Base Maintenance Activities</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>training Service</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in Service Support</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| A400M                      | \-                       | 2238                  | 2339                      |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>2238</Td>
<td>2710</Td>
<td>+472</Td>
<td>-42</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>2238</Td>
<td>2710</Td>
<td>+472</Td>
<td>-42</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 A400M

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2015</Td>
<td>-35</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>an in Year Gain Due to an Increase in the Value of £ vs € as a Result of the Difference Between the Set Planning Exchange Rate and the Actual Outturn.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2015</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>a Reduction to in Year Provision Due to a Deferral of a Decision on Requirements Linked to Future Capability Milestones. Financial Liability for any Subsequent Requirement is Owned by HQ Air.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>february 2015</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>a Reduction as a Result of the Actual Contract Cost of Equipment Being less than Forecast.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>a Reduction to the Future Provision for Variation of Price Due to the Delivery of Two Aircraft Earlier than Previously Scheduled.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-51</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>a Reduction Due to Changes in the MoD Central Planning Assumption on the £ : € Exchange Rate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>an Increase Due to an Increased Requirement for UK Specific Trials and Evaluation Work in Support of Aircraft Entry into Service</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+575</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>uk Contribution to the Multinational Export Levy Facility Provided to EADS by A400M Partner Nations.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>reduction in Number of Aircraft to be Equipped with Defensive Aids SubSystem from 25 to 9. Increased Costs Due to Contract Slippage.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Changed

Capability

Requirements
</Td>
<td>a Planning Round 2011 Option to Swap an Early Delivery Aircraft with One Due to be Delivered Later to Ensure that the Whole Fleet Has the Same Specification.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Procurement

Processes - International

Collaboration
</Td>
<td>a Planning Round 2011 Option to Reprofile Payments to Align Them with the Revised Delivery Schedule Agreed in the Six Nation International Collaborative Contract () and Associated Risk ().</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Procurement

Processes - International

Collaboration
</Td>
<td>a Change Due to a Realignment of Payments with the Revised Programme Schedule Agreed in the Six Nation International Collaborative Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>foreign Exchange Increases Due to Changes in Planning Assumptions.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Inflation
</Td>
<td>an Increase Due to Changes in Inflation Assumptions in the 2011 Planning Round.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>removal of Indirect RDEL (Foreign Exchange) in Accordance with a Change in Departmental Policy.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>an in Year Gain Due to the Increase in the Value of £ vs € Due to the Difference Between the Set Planning Exchange Rate and Actual Outturn.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Procurement

Processes - International

Collaboration
</Td>
<td>a Change Due to Programme Rebalancing as a Result of Work Undertaken in Support of Concluding an Amended Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>loss Due to the Difference Between the Set Planning Exchange Rate and Forecast Outturn.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>revised Costing for Mission Planning System Due to Change from Acquisition Only to also Include Support.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>a Loss in 2008/2009 Due to the Fall in Value of £ vs €</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Changed

Capability

Requirements
</Td>
<td>portable Removable on-Board Inert Gas Generation System Fuel Tank Inerting System.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Inflation
</Td>
<td>an Increase Based on Latest Delivery Schedule.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>an Increase in 2008/2009</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>inclusion of Additional Airworthiness Support to Cover Aircraft Release to Service.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>variation in 2008/2009</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Historic

\\\

Inflation

An Increase i

n 2008/2009.

Historic

-77

Budgetary

Factors

Departmental Reviews Have

Identified Savings to Programme Risks

(-

£20m). Changed Delivery Profile

From that in the Business Case (-

£61m). Minor Realism Adjustments,

Includes UK Share of Organisation

Conjointe De Coopération en Matière

d'ARmement (OCCAR) Programme

Division Costs (+£5m), QinetiQ

Support Costs Increased (+£1m),

Unidentified Variance (+£1m).

Realism Reprofile of Development

Production Phase Contract Together

With Directed Infra-Red Counter

Measures and Cargo Hold Mock-Up

Costs (

\-

£3m)

Historic

-329

Changed

Capability

Requirements

Fuel Tank Inertion System Pipe Work

£6m). Deletion of Centralised

(+

Crypto Management Unit

Requirement (-£12m). Deletion of Civil

Pallets Configuration Item (-£5m).

Addition of Propeller Brake (+£6m).

Programme Measure to Move

Deferred Configuration Items Back

Into Aircraft Delivery Profile (-£2m).

Reduction in Number of Aircraft to be

Equipped with Defensive Aids Sub-

System from 25 to 9 (-£238m).

Programme Option to Delete and

Defer Configuration Items and to Slip

In Service Date by 12 Months. (-

£81m). Delay of Programme by 9

Months (-£12m), Option Bringing the

Defensive Aids Sub-System Forward

Onto Aircraft 1

\-

(+£9m).

9

Net Variation (£m)

+472

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>training Service</Td>
<td>526</Td>
<td>489</Td>
<td>-37</Td>
<td>-37</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in Service Support</Td>
<td>450</Td>
<td>401</Td>
<td>-50</Td>
<td>-50</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Training Service

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2015
</Td>
<td>-19</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>a Reduction Due to the Actual Contracted Cost of Equipment and Services Being less than Forecast.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2015
</Td>
<td>-13</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>a Reduction Due to the Nonmaterialisation of Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
March 2015
</Th>
<th>-5</Th>
<th>exchange Rate</Th>
<th>an in Year Gain Due to the Increase in the Value of the £ vs € Due to the Difference Between the Forecast Exchange Rate and Actual Outturn.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-37</Td>
<td>ref!</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.4.1.2 in Service Support

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2015
</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
A Reduction Due to the Nonmaterialisation of Risk.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2015
</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>
An in Year Gain Due to the Increase in the Value of the £ vs € Due to the Difference Between the Forecast Exchange Rate and Actual Outturn.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
March 2015
</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
A Reduction in the Final Contract Cost as a Result of a Gainshare Clause.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>december 2014</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
A Reduction in the Forecast Cost of in Service Support as a Result of Late Aircraft Deliveries.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
October 2014
</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
The Provision of Interim Maintenance Infrastructure Prior to the Construction of the New A400M Hangar.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
September 2014
</Td>
<td>-35</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>
A Reduction in the Final Value of the Contract as a Result of Negotiations.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-50</Td>
<td>ref!</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.2 Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Cost Variations –
N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>1230</Td>
<td>519</Td>
<td>1750</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase (Training)</Td>
<td>147</Td>
<td>29</Td>
<td>176</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase (in Service Support)</Td>
<td>52</Td>
<td>158</Td>
<td>210</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>1430</Td>
<td>706</Td>
<td>2136</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main

Investment

Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>
July 1997
</Td>
<td>
May 2000
</Td>
<td>
34
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
February 2009
</Td>
<td>
December 2009
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>
In-Service Date Defined as Delivery of the Seventh Aircraft with Military Aircraft Release and Support Arrangements.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>february 2009</Td>
<td>
September 2015
</Td>
<td>+79</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 A400M

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>january 2015</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>updated Programme Estimate Based on an Assessment of the Airbus Defence &amp; Space Revised Delivery Schedule.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>procurement Processes - International Collaboration</Td>
<td>a Change Due to Programme Rebalancing.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>updated Programme Estimate Based Upon A400M Task Force Outputs and Air Support Cluster Assessment.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>updated Programme Proposal Received from Airbus Military, Including Revised Production Approach.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>programme Delays Affecting Engine and Aircraft First Flight.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Latest Delay and Risk Assessment Beyond First Flight.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+9</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Contractor Delay to Aircraft Delivery.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+16</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>change in the Customer's Requirement Flowing from Changed Budgetary Priorities.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Historic

+9

Procurement

Processes

Delay in Bringing Contract into

Effect as a Result of Delayed

Approvals in Germany.

Net Variation

/

(+

-

Months)

+79

## C.3.4 Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation

Project/Increment

Name

Date

£m (+ Cost / -

Saving)

Category

Reason for

Expenditure or

Saving

A400M

Historic

+41

The Department

Has Extended the

Service Life of the

Hercules C-130k

until the End of

2012

.

Total

+41

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 76%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>
Reported in MPR 2015: The Further Six Month Delay to the UK Declaration of in Service Date is not Expected to Have any Direct Impact on the Delivery of UK Military Capability. Delivery Dates for Future Capability Increments Forecast by Airbus Defence and Space are not Affected by Current Production Delays, and Align with UK Capability Milestones.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>a400m</Td>
<td>
Reported in MPR 2009: The Revised Forecast A400M in Service Date No Longer Aligns with the C-130k Out of Service Date of 2013. This Increases the Pressure on Existing Tactical Airlift Capability from 2013 to 2015. Interim Measures to Mitigate this Include Action to Increase the Availability of the Remaining C-130j Fleet.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – N/a

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract

## C.5.1 Scope of Support / Training / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 76%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>training Service</Td>
<td>provision and Support of the A400M Schoolhouse, Support of Training Equipment, Provision of Instructors and Course Design Personnel.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>training Service</Td>
<td>february 2013</Td>
<td>february 2013</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in Service Support</Td>
<td>
September 2014
</Td>
<td>
September 2014
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.3 Progress Against Approved End of Support / Training / PFI Contract Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>in-Year

Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>training Service</Td>
<td>
March 2030
</Td>
<td>
March 2030
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in Service Support</Td>
<td>
September 2016
</Td>
<td>
September 2016
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.4 Other Costs Resulting from Support Cost Variation – N/a

## C.5.5 Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Support Contract Variation – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

| Current Score | Comments                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| 66                | the Reduction from Last Year’s Score is Principally Due to the Declaration of a Six Month Slip to in Service Date as a Result of Airbus Defence and Space not Meeting the Contracted Aircraft Delivery Schedule. |

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
22 A400M Aircraft, Mission Planning and Ground Support Systems
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
UK A400M Training Solution, Including Interim Use of the International Training Centre in Seville.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
In-Service Support Contract.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
A400M Infrastructure Projects, Including an Electronic Warfare Facility at RAF Waddington and Necessary Modifications at the Main Operating Base, RAF Brize Norton.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Formation of Squadrons and Related Service Personnel
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Agreed Capability Milestones, Including Aerial Delivery and Tactical Operation Concepts.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
A400M is Being Overseen by Strategic Mobility (Air) Project Board
&amp; Future Brize Project Board.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Integration of the Mission Planning (Including Electronic Warfare) and Ground Support Systems into Wider MOD Operational and Logistic Support Structures.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>february 2015</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>a Third Party Assessor Has Been Used to Map RAF Engineering Qualifications to Airbus Civil Licensing Requirements.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>february 2015</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>sufficient Aircrew with the Required Competencies for Instructional Duties are Expected.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects that the in Service Support Assessment Phase Has Concluded and that the Necessary Interim Support Infrastructure is in Place for the Expected First Aircraft Delivery in September 2014.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>personnel</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>due to Potential Deficiencies in the Number of Aircrew with the Required Competencies to Undertake Instructional Duties.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>due to Ongoing Airbus Redesign of Aircraft Ground Support Systems and Security Accreditation Pressures</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects that the Amended Contract Includes Revised Aircraft Production and Delivery Schedules.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects that the Training Service Assessment Phase is Still Underway.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Potential Impact of the Rebaselined Programme, and that an Amended Contract is Still to be Concluded.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Potential Impact of Depth Maintenance Facility Risk on Delivery of Logistic Support Solution.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects that the Support Assessment Phase is Still Underway.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>updated Programme Proposal Received from Airbus Military, Including Revised Production Approach.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>reflects Latest Delay and the Wider Future Brize Norton Study.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1 A400M

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1,2,6,8</Td>
<td>the A400M Fleet Must be Capable of the Deployment of 4200 Tonnes of Freight over 3200 Nm in a 7-Day Period.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>a400m Must be Capable of Carrying a Payload of 32 000kg.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>a400m is to be Capable of Operating by Day or by Night, in all Weather Conditions Commensurate with Worldwide Air Transport Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1,6</Td>
<td>a400m is to be Capable of Autonomous Operations from Semi-Prepared Surfaces with a Runway Length of 3 500 Ft.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>1,6,8</Td>
<td>a400m is to Have a Self-Contained, Non-Radiating Navigation System. the Navigation System's Performance is to be Compatible with Low-Level and Aerial Delivery Operations Worldwide.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>a400m is to Meet Mandatory Interoperability Requirements for Civil General Air Traffic Operations and UK Military Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
<td>a Defensive Aids Suite is Required.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>1,2,6</Td>
<td>a400m is to be Capable of Aerial Delivery of Paratroops, Vehicles and Stores.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
9
</Td>
<td>2,5,7</Td>
<td>a400m is to be Capable of Being Operated on Routine Strategic and Tactical Missions by a Combat Ready Crew Comprising of Two Pilots and One Air Loadmaster. for more Demanding Tactical Scenarios, a Requirement for a Third Flight Deck Crewmember will be Acceptable.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
9 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
9 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.4. Support and Training Contract

## D.4.1 Training

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1</Td>
<td>1, 2, 4</Td>
<td>the User Shall Have A400M Training by Capability Milestone 4 (Initial Deployment Capability) that is Able to React at Short Notice to Changing Environments and Operational Demands.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 2</Td>
<td>1, 2, 4, 6</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Train Sufficient Numbers of Aircrew to Maintain the Required Readiness States and Have the Knowledge and Skills to Utilise the A400M in Accordance with UK Operational Requirements Across Its Entire Spectrum of Operations by Capability Milestone 8 (Full Operational Capability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>1, 2, 3, 4, 6</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Train Sufficient Numbers of Support Personnel to Maintain the Required Readiness States and Have the Knowledge and Skills to Utilise the A400M in Accordance with UK Operational Requirements Across Its Entire Spectrum of Operations by Capability Milestone 8 (Full Operational Capability).</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4</Td>
<td>1, 2, 3, 4, 6</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Train Maintenance Personnel and Aircraft Ground Engineers, Including Survival Equipment Fitters and Weapons Technicians, to Provide Forward and Depth Engineering Support to the A400M, to Meet UK Operational Requirements, by Capability Milestone 8 (Full Operational Capability).</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5</Td>
<td>1, 2, 3, 4, 6</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Train Air Despatch, Airborne Delivery, Air Movements, Aeromedical and Other Personnel to Meet UK Operational Requirements.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>1, 2, 6, 8</Td>
<td>for all Aircraft Upgrades or Modifications to the Aircraft Through to Out-of-Service Date, the Users Shall be Provided with a Capability to Update Synthetic Training Hardware, Software and Documentation to Accurately Reflect all Changes or Upgrades in the Real Aircraft Equipment and Software Programs</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>6 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>6 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>initial Assessment. Reflects Current Status of Progress Against the Plan to Meet this KPM, which is in Its Early Stages.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>initial Assessment. Reflects the Risk that it Might not Prove Practicable for the Training Solution to Replicate a Future Aircraft Modification or Amendment to Live Training Procedures.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

### D.4.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

## D.4.2 in-Service Support

### D.4.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1, 3, 6, 8</Td>
<td>fleet Tasking and Availability Management. the Service will Integrate with the Allocation of Fixedwing Air Mobility Support Processes to Ensure that Defence Tasks Against A400M are Assigned and Dispatched.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1, 3, 8</Td>
<td>technical Services. These will Provide Military Aviation Authority Regulatory Publication (MRP) Part M, Sub-Part G Support to the MOD Continuing Airworthiness Manager. This will Include Technical Queries, Maintenance Programme Optimisation and Direction to the Maintenance Operation. It will also Include Support to Flight Operations Tools and Ground Support Systems.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
3
</Th>
<th>1, 3</Th>
<th>maintenance Services. These will be Delivered Through Two MRP Part 145 Approved Organisations; Line Maintenance Through the Single Engineering Organisation and Base Maintenance Through a Maintenance Repair and Overhaul Organisation.</Th>
<th>
Yes
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td>1, 3</Td>
<td>materiel Support. This Service will Manage A400M Atlas Spares, Providing Them to the Point of Need, Including the Joint Supply Chain when Required. the Materiel Support Service will Utilise the Spares Pool with France as Required.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
4 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
4 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.4.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a
