---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Page_from: 137.0
Page_to: 147.0
Project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_137_147.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 57%" />
<col Style="Width: 42%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Military Afloat Reach Sustainability
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Afloat Support
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Brigadier John Brittain Commodore William Walworth
</Td>
<td>march 2011 November 2012 November 2012 September 2013</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects / Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Fleet Solid Support Ships
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Provide Afloat Logistic Support to UK and Allied Maritime Task Groups at Sea and their Amphibious Components Operating Ashore. Although not Strictly a One-for-One Replacement Programme, New Vessels will Incrementally Replace Much of the Existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary Flotilla. the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability is Designed to Support Three Distinct Types of Maritime Task Group: Carrier Strike, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Security. the Demands of Each Differ Significantly, but are all Composed of Three Common Elements:
Bulk Consumables - Fuel and Potable Water which are Transferred by Hose. Non-Bulk Consumables - Food, Ammunition and General Stores. Solid Cargo which is Transferred in Unit Loads, Either Ship to Ship or Ship to Shore. Forward Aviation Support - The Provision of Helicopter Basing and Operating Facilities to Accommodate some of the Task Group’s Aircraft or to Provide Operational Flexibility During a Campaign. the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability will be in Service into the 2050s and will be Designed to Accommodate the Requirements of Current and Known Future Force Structures, Including Type 45, the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers, Joint Combat Aircraft and Type 26 Global Combat Ship. Tankers will Provide Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group. Solid Support Ships, Previously Referred to as Fleet Solid Support and Amphibious Combat Stores Ship, will Provide Non Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group. the Capability to be Provided is Essential to the Evolving Logistic Support Needs of the Royal Navy. the Proposed Procurement Profile of Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Ships Has Been Matched to this Need, the Initial Focus Being on the Double-Hulled Tankers which are Required in Order to Comply with International Maritime Environmental Standards.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme Received Formal Approval to Enter Its

Assessment Phase in July 2005 Based on an Alliance Strategy. Following a Review of the

Procurement Strategy in 2007, the Alliance Strategy Was Terminated. a New Strategy, Based on a ‘competitive and Adaptive’ Approach, Was Approved and Reflected the Need to Procure the Tanker Element of the Programme Separately in Order to Comply with International Maritime Legislation. in Addition Approval Was Granted for the Designation and Delegation of the Heavy Replenishment at Sea Project as a Separate Category D Project. Solid Support Ships will Now Form a Separate Strategy. an Open International Competition Was Launched for the Design and Build of Up to Six Fleet Tankers but Was Cancelled Following the Department's Examination of Its Equipment Programme in 2008. a Review of the Requirements and Procurement Strategy Was Undertaken which Concluded that a more Open Procurement Strategy to Consider a Range of Possible Solutions and which Take Account of Current Market Conditions is more Likely to Secure Best Value for Money for the MOD. on this Basis a New International Competition for Up to Six Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers Was Launched in October 2009 which Was Conducted using the Competitive Dialogue Process. Subsequently the Requirement Was Reduced from Six Ships to Four as a Result of the Strategic Defence and Security Review.

Following Assessment of Initial Pre Qualification Questionnaires Six Companies Were Invited to Proceed to the Next Stage of the Competition. the Competition Was Conducted over Three Stages Stage 1 -
Invitation to Submit Outline Solutions Took Place over March to September 2010. Stage 2 - Invitation to Submit Detailed Solutions Commenced in October 2010 and Continued Through to

Invitation to Submit Final Bids in October 2011 which Was Issued to Three Companies; Daewoo

Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (Republic of Korea), Fincantieri (Italy), Hyundai Heavy

Industries (Republic of Korea). Three Companies Withdrew Earlier in the Competition; Flensburger Schiffbau-Gesellschaft (Germany); Knutsen OAS Ltd in June 2011 and A&P Group Ltd in August 2011.

The Current Approved Budget for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase is

£44m and the Current Forecast for the Assessment Phase £17m. Following Planning Round 12 the Tanker Element of the Programme Was Considered to be Part of the Core Equipment Programme. the Fleet Solid Support Element of the Programme will be Considered as a Non Core Equipment Programme which will Require Further Departmental Review Before Further Work is Undertaken and Therefore No Further Forecast Assessment Phase Expenditure is Included.

## A.3. Project History

The Main Gate Business Case for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Committee in October 2011. the Performance Cost and Time Envelope Put Forward Was Based on Available Indicative Information the Approval of which Enabled the Department to Proceed to the Final Bid Stage of the Competition. Further Departmental and HM Treasury Approval to Proceed to Contract Award Was Received in January 2012 and Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Was Named as the Preferred Bidder in February 2012. the Contract Was Placed in March 2012.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

In Accordance with the Department's Approvals Process the Final Performance Cost and Time Was Approved in December 2012 Providing the Project's Baseline. in June 2012 Her Majesty the Queen Approved the Names of the Tankers Confirmed to be RFA TIDESPRING, RFA TIDERACE, RFA TIDESURGE, RFA TIDEFORCE. the Preliminary Design Review Was Completed in July 2012. Progress Has Been Made Towards Design Transition from BMT Defence Services' Basic Design Phase to Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Detailed Design Phase which is Due to Complete in Summer 2013.

## A.5. Capability Risks

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Deliver Future Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships, Replacing the Current Capability, to Support the Future Royal Navy. Without the Support of These Ships, the Ability of the Royal Navy to Carry Out Global Operations will be Severely Restricted. Double Hulled Naval Tankers are Required as Soon as is Practicable to Comply with International Maritime Legislation;
The Royal Fleet Auxiliary Currently Operates Two Double Hulled Tankers and Four Single Hulled Tankers under Exemption from Legislation. the Number of Ships with Single Hulled Tanks Was Reduced from Six to Four in 2011 as a Result of the Strategic Defence and Security Review. All Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships are Maintained to UK Regulatory and Classifications Standards; Should this Certification and Classification be Withdrawn for Single Hulled Tankers, their Operation Would Cease Immediately Leading to Severe Operational Limitations on the Ability of the Royal Navy to Operate Worldwide and in Anything but the Most Benign Environments. Foreign Nations Have Already Begun to Deny Port Access for Single Hulled Tankers and this Situation will be Exacerbated as a Consequence of any Environmental Incident, MOD Shipping Related or Not. Programming for Operations Takes Account of Environmental Restrictions as Well as Limitations on Ships Due to their Material State; for Example some of the Older Ships are Unable to Operate in Colder Climates Due to the Steel in their Ageing Hulls Becoming Brittle. These Ships will be Replaced as the Double Hulled Tanker Element of the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme is Delivered.

## A.6. Associated Projects - N/a

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>daewoo

Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering
</Td>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="7">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="5">
The Contract with Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Includes Two Years Intial Provisioning Including Spares and Training for Each of the Ships. the in Service Support Support will be Subject to Competition.
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>-27</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>-27</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Lowest Approved (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Approved (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
596
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>596</Td>
<td>595</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>596</Td>
<td>595</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>gradual Reduction in Elements of Risk</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>17</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>11</Td>
<td>52</Td>
<td>63</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>28</Td>
<td>52</Td>
<td>80</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

The Forecast Cost of the Assessment Phase Reflects the Expenditure Up to the Main Investment Decision for Military Afloat Reach & Sustainability Tankers and Does not Include any Further Expenditure on the Fleet Solid Support Ships which are not Currently in the Core Equipment Programme.

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>july 2005</Td>
<td>january 2012</Td>
<td>78</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
October 2016
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>the Date when the Sponsor Accepts the MARS Tanker as Being Operationally Capable to Its Fullest Extent; or the Date when the Sponsor Agrees with the User that the MARS Tanker Has Achieved Operational Capability in an Agreed Minimum Effective Deployable Form.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>october 2016</Td>
<td>october 2016</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation - N/a

## C.3.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation - N/a

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation - N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>declared when all Ships of Class are Accepted into Service</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>last Years Score</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
97%
</Td>
<td>
86%
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>
Not Met /

Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>design and Manufacture Phases of MARS Tanker to the Point of Declaring Acceptance into Service</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>establishment of a Timely Training Plan to Support MARS Tanker Within the Directed Resources.</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>through-Life Support Plan and Integrated Logistics Support Plan.</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>readiness of UK and Overseas Port and Shoreside Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>timely Establishment of Front Line Command Manpower.</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>doctrinal Direction Underpins Safe and Effective Introduction into Service</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>policy Underpins Safe and Effective Introduction into Service</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>fully Accredited C4I Information Systems</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (4)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2. Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>defence Line of Development</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2013
</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>design and Manufacture of MARS Tankers. There is Risk in the Transition from Outline Design to Detailed Design Work Owing to Tight Timescale and Overseas Build Option. if Realised this Risk Could Cause a Cost or Time Overrun.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>establishment of a Timely Training Plan to Support MARS Tanker Within the Dedicated Resources. There is a Risk that a Sufficiently Robust Training Plan is not Developed in Time to Support Acceptance from Contract, of the Early Vessels, Due to the Delay in Completion of Integrated Logistics Support Tasks (Training Needs Analysis). the Risk Could Lead to a Delay in Acceptance of the Vessels and Potential Cost Increase.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>through Life Support Plan and Integrated Logistics Support Solution. There is a Risk that the Through Life Support Plan will not be Developed, to Sufficient Maturity, to Provide Anticipated Through Life Savings Thus Increasing the Cost of the Vessels. This is Due to Contractual Confusion over Responsibilities and Requirements for Integrated Logistics Support.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>timely Establishment of Front Line Command Manpower. There is a Risk that Insufficient Suitably Qualified Manpower will be Available to Accept Delivery and Support Manning of the Vessels. This is Due to a Shortfall in General Recruitment Numbers and Unforecast Levels of Outflow Together with Uncertainty in the Training Burden</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1. Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>cargo Capacity. the Platform Shall Store  of Useable Class II Fuel.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>2</Th>
<th>logistics</Th>
<th>cargo Embarkation. the Platform Shall Embark Cargo Bulk Logistics Materiel Iaw OCIMF Publication Recommendations for Oil Tanker Manifolds and Associated Equipment 4th Edition 1991</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>replenishment at Sea Capability. the Platform Shall Deliver Bulk Logistics Materiel Whilst Underway and Making Way at  Knots Through the Water.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>replenishment Tempo. the Platform Shall Deliver Bulk Logistics Material to 3 Exchange Points Concurrently.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>platform Speed. the Platform Shall Propel Itself at an Upper Sustained Speed of  Knots</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>platform Endurance. the Platform Shall Have an Endurance of  Nautical Miles at a Sustained Speed of Knots</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>platform Equipment Performance. the Platform Shall Deliver Core MARS Tanker Platform Functions in Sea Temperatures Up to °c.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>survivability. the Platform Shall Enable AWW Self Defence.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
9
</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>cis Interoperability. the Platform Shall Exchange Information Iaw MoD CIS Policy as Recorded in the JSP 600 Series of Directions.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>physical Interoperability. the MARS System Shall Provide Logistics Sustainment to UK/US and NATO Military Operations.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
11
</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>aviation. the Platform Shall Conduct the Launch and Recovery of Rotorcraft (Aircraft Types Merlin Mk1 or Mk2, SCMR &amp; Chinook).</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>11 (0)</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation - N/a

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation - N/a

## D.4. Support Contract - N/a
