---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: NAVAL EXTREMELY HIGH FREQUENCY/SUPER HIGH FREQUENCY SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
  TERMINALS
page_from: 85.0
page_to: 94.0
project_label: NAVAL EXTREMELY HIGH FREQUENCY/SUPER HIGH FREQUENCY SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
  TERMINALS
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_85_94.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

NAVAL EXTREMELY

HIGH

FREQUENCY/SUPER

HIGH FREQUENCY

SATELLITE

COMMUNICATIONS TERMINALS

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

GLOBAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Command and Control Information Infrastructure)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal is a communication project that will provide highly protected, high data rate satellite communication capability to selected submarines and Command Capable platforms. It will deliver capacity to covertly exchange large volumes of information with co-operating forces and command, survival against jamming, low vulnerability to geo-location and direct interoperability with UK, US and allied forces.

Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal is an international collaborative programme based on the US Advanced Extremely High Frequency programme, under which the UK along with Canada and the Netherlands have signed a Memorandum Of Understanding for utilisation of an agreed share of the capacity of a new constellation of Advanced Extremely High Frequency satellites due to enter service from 2010 onwards. Terminals, submarine masts, and antennas for ships and shore stations to meet the UK requirements have been ordered under US Foreign Military Sales arrangements. Manufacture of submarine masts is complete and the remaining Foreign Military Sales articles are on contract with Raytheon Company. In view of the key dependence on US acquisition projects, there is no overall prime contractor and MoD is performing the role of the Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal system design authority with technical support provided by Qinetiq. Installation of Naval Extremely High

Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal equipment and integration with existing and planned information infrastructure has been contracted for with the relevant providers via the associated platform or project Integrated Project Teams.

Slippage to the US Advanced Extremely High Frequency satellite programme has made it impossible to achieve the UK Advanced Extremely High Frequency ISD as endorsed in the Main Gate Business Case. As a consequence, the strategy for deployment of terminal types across platforms has been reviewed with emphasis on the need to ensure Astute submarines have a satellite communication capability on build. US Department of Defence have given approval for early release of modified Super High Frequency Follow On Terminals, that will be fitted in Astute Class submarines and deliver a capability to meet some of the system requirements over UK Skynet 4&5 satellites by September 2009 (ISD). The Advanced Extremely High Frequency In Service Date is dependent upon the deployment of the Advanced Extremely High Frequency satellite constellation and the delivery of Navy Multiband Terminals for UK submarines, carriers and satellite ground stations; forecast is May 2012. There is a need to submit a Review Note to the Approving Authorities in order to gain approval of the revised forecasts of Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite communications Terminal ISD and costs.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Astute Boat 1</td>
<td>
2009
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Lockheed Martin Corporation</td>
<td>Development and Production of

Advanced Extremely

High Frequency

Satellites
</td>
<td>
Cost Plus Award Fee
</td>
<td>UK participation through Memorandum

Of Understanding agreement with US Department of Defence. Contract is between US Department of

Defence and Lockheed Martin Corporation.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Raytheon Company
</td>
<td>
Production of Satellite Communication

Terminals and

Submarine Antennas
</td>
<td>Terminals:
Cost Plus Incentive Fee Antennas:
Firm Fixed Price</td>
<td>
Non-competitive

Foreign Military Sales agreement with US Department of Defence/Program Executive Office

Command Control

Communications Computers Information &amp;Space.

Contract is between US Department of Defence and Raytheon.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Raytheon Company
</td>
<td>Development and

Production of Navy

Multiband Terminals and Advanced

Extremely High Frequency Antennas
</td>
<td>
Cost Plus Award Fee
</td>
<td>
Competitive

Foreign Military Sales agreement with US Department of Defence/Program Executive Office

Command Control Communication Computers Information
&amp;Space Contract is between US Department of Defence and Raytheon.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
200
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
290
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-90
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-9
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Date</th>
<th colspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th colspan="2">Factor</th>
<th colspan="2">Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">March 2008</td>
<td colspan="2">-2</td>
<td colspan="2">Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td colspan="2">Final in year spend lower than forecast and change in Cost of Capital due to revised profile of deliveries.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">January 2008`</td>
<td colspan="2">-7</td>
<td colspan="2">
Contracting Process
</td>
<td colspan="2">Delay on Astute feasibility studies and the United States Naval Maritime Terminal programme.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Historic</td>
<td colspan="2">-25</td>
<td colspan="2">Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td colspan="2">Add back of Contracted Out Services VAT, previously omitted from forecast, to align with Main Gate approval (+£2m). Spend incurred by Astute Submarine &amp; Major Warships Integrated Project Teams on behalf of Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal programme omitted from sunk costs in previous forecast (+£4m). Support related costs included in forecast in error, mainly relating to Advanced Extremely High Frequency satellite Operation &amp;
Support Memorandum of Understanding funding (-£31m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Historic</td>
<td colspan="2">-13</td>
<td colspan="2">Changed Requirement</td>
<td colspan="2">Variation to reflect draft Review Note financial costings based on updated Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal investment appraisal and cost model (-£13m). Additional funding for Enhanced Ship Submersible Nuclear Information eXchange as part of Equipment Plan 2005 Option to defer main Naval Extremely High</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Date</td>
<td colspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td colspan="2">Factor</td>
<td colspan="2">Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="2">Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal programme (+£2m). Reduction in number of spare masts procured as approved in Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal Review Note July 2004 (-£2m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Historic</td>
<td colspan="2">-18</td>
<td colspan="2">Exchange Rate</td>
<td colspan="2">Revaluation of programme costs to reflect revised exchange rates.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Historic</td>
<td colspan="2">-4</td>
<td colspan="2">
Technical Factors
</td>
<td colspan="2">Cost reduction due to maturity of technical risks.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Historic</td>
<td colspan="2">-21</td>
<td colspan="2">Risk Differential</td>
<td colspan="2">Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely and the approved not to exceed figures in the Main Gate Business Case.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Net Variation</td>
<td colspan="2">-90</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
87
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2008/2009
</td>
<td>
2011/2012
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost[^1]

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12.4</td>
<td>
12.0
</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>
11
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
As being fitted, set to work and supportable in one Ship Submersible Nuclear (Trafalgar or Astute), one Command Capable Ship and a shore Head Quarter with Advanced Extremely High Frequency space segment availability.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
May 2012
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
November 2009
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+30
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+19
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td>+19</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Detailed evaluation of the US Advanced Extremely High Frequency satellite delays and delays to Navy Multiband Terminal delays, impact on the ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Initial estimate based on technical delays to US Advanced Extremely High Frequency satellites and US re-profiling of terminal development..</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+30</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>Cost £m</th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Interim Equipment Procurement
</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
Procurement Costs of Enhanced Ship Submersible Nuclear Information eXchange, an interim capability provisioned for the 3 Trafalgar Class Submarines.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support of Interim Equipment</td>
<td>+2</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
Support Costs for interim capability
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>+5</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

The late arrival of Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite

Communication Terminal will result in a delay in providing Ships Submersible Nuclear the ability to integrate with network-based operations and the distributed collaborative planning and shared situational awareness for which Network Enabled Capability is the enabler (Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal is viewed as the only viable bearer for delivery of Defence Information Infrastructure enterprise services (Joint Command & Control Support Programme etc) to submarines, and so is pivotal for the more effective integration of Ship Submersible Nuclears in Joint and Coalition operations). The interim nature of Enhanced Ship Submersible Nuclear Information eXchange is important as concerns exist over the continued use of International Maritime Satellite

Communication. Specifically, International Maritime Satellite Communication does not deliver assured communications, there are clear conflicts over its use for offensive strike and the International Maritime Satellite Communication Charter, and elements of the architecture are grounded in China. Enhanced Ship Submersible Nuclear Information eXchange provides a lower data rate when compared with Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite communication Terminal.

There will be limited capability on those Enhanced Ship Submersible Nuclear Information eXchange fitted vessels. Without Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal, there is an increase in vulnerability through geo-location and near-surface presence, reducing submarines’ ability to contribute to Military Tasks 1.1 (Strategic Intelligence) & 1.2 (Nuclear Deterrence).

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">KUR Serial</th>
<th colspan="2">
Key Requirement
</th>
<th colspan="2">Forecast to be Met</th>
<th colspan="2">
At Risk
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">01</td>
<td colspan="2">
Capacity - The user requires Satellite Communication capacity to support the operational needs of Ships Submersible Nuclear and surface ships
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">02</td>
<td colspan="2">
Interoperability - The user shall be able to exchange information between co-operating forces in national, joint and coalition operations
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">03</td>
<td colspan="2">
Survivability - The user shall be able to exchange critical information and maintain communications, such that hostile action or natural disturbances will not disrupt the conduct of operations
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">04</td>
<td colspan="2">
Covertness - The user shall be able to conduct operations whilst preserving the unique characteristics of stealth
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">05</td>
<td colspan="2">
Coherency - The user requires coherence between Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal and other joint Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance &amp; reconnaissance systems, Network Enabled Capability initiatives and supporting infrastructure
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">06</td>
<td colspan="2">
Assured Information Delivery - The user shall have assured access to information services and end to end information delivery as required to conduct military tasking
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">07</td>
<td colspan="2">
Integrated Logistics Support - The user requires that Integrated Logistics Support (Availability Reliability &amp; Maintainability, training and manning requirements) will be provided throughout the lifespan/timescale of the equipment
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">08</td>
<td colspan="2">
Security – The user shall be able to exchange information at multiple security levels up to and including UK Top Secret Codeword, US Special Category Information and special category information at one, two and four eyes compartment levels
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">09</td>
<td colspan="2">
Environment - The user requires the capability to be available throughout the gamut of submarine, ship and shore operational scenarios
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">10</td>
<td colspan="2">
Installation - The user requires capability insertion in accordance with current MoD Warship Support Agency procedures and national Health
&amp; Safety at Work legislation,
</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
<td colspan="2">-</td>
<td colspan="2">
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
KUR Serial
</td>
<td colspan="2">
Key Requirement
</td>
<td colspan="2">Forecast to be

Met
</td>
<td colspan="2">
At Risk
</td>
<td colspan="2">
Not to be Met
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="2">
with minimum interference and at the earliest possible opportunity
</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="4">
100%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td colspan="4">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

In March 2001, MoD considered an Initial Gate Business Case for Naval Extremely High

Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite communication Terminal and approved an

Assessment Phase designed to establish the most cost-effective solution for meeting submarine Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication terminal requirements, Command Ships Operational Control requirements and the associated shore infrastructure.

A number of options were investigated including the provision of commercial Satellite

Communication, Super High Frequency only, Extremely High Frequency only and dual Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency. The operational benefits and value for money were reported in the Main Gate Business Case which recommended that Extremely High Frequency was the only solution that can provide non-geolocatable, high capacity communications that enable the submarine to remain covert. It also identified that Super High Frequency can provide nationally assured high capacity information exchange with UK but suffers weaknesses in highly stressed environments. The recommendation was accepted for a dual Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency capability.

Although the UK was procuring Super High Frequency Satellite Communication within SKYNET5, Assessment Phase studies concluded that the UK service provision model would not be cost effective for an Extremely High Frequency capability and the SKYNET 5 PFI contractor would not provide an Extremely High Frequency space segment. A Memorandum Of Understanding was negotiated to achieve participation in the US Advanced Extremely High Frequency programme to secure sufficient capacity to support Ship Submersible Nuclear operations. For similar reasons of value for money, it was agreed that terminal equipment and submarine Satellite Communication masts would be procured under Foreign Military Sales procedures, thus allowing the MoD to benefit from quantity discounts by joining large US Navy production orders, harmonise UK and US Ship Submersible Nuclear satellite Communication programmes and minimise non-recurring expenditure.

The Main Gate Business Case also recognised that given the dependencies on US programmes, a Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite Communication Terminal prime contractor would have no control over the various platform primes and MoD would be unable to pass on system design and interface risks. Accordingly, the approved strategy was that the Naval Extremely High Frequency/Super High Frequency Satellite communication Terminal project retains system design authority and contract technical support for specific tasks on a firm price basis.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 3                         | 1 %                                                       |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 3                         | 1 %                                                       |
| Variation                     | 0                         |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
August 2003
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
March 2001
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
29
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>242</td>
<td>269</td>
<td>290</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>90</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
September 2009
</td>
<td>
October 2009
</td>
<td>
November 2009
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2007
</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

[^1]: This is an average UPC across a selection of different platform fits.
