---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate
Project: MODERNISED TARGET ACQUISITION DESIGNATION SIGHT / PILOTS NIGHT VISION SENSOR
Page_from: 77.0
Page_to: 84.0
Project_label: MODERNISED TARGET ACQUISITION DESIGNATION SIGHT / PILOTS NIGHT VISION
  SENSOR
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_77_84.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

MODERNISED TARGET ACQUISITION DESIGNATION SIGHT / PILOTS NIGHT VISION SENSOR

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

ATTACK HELICOPTER

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Air and Littoral Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the PROJECT

## 1a. Project Description, Progress and Key Future Events

In 2004, the Apache Army Helicopter Mk1 Support Reappraisal Project Identified Options to Achieve Significant Whole Life Cost Savings over the Service Life of the Aircraft to 2031. One of These Options Was the Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight Programme. the Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight Programme Upgrades Four Existing Systems on the Apache Army Helicopter Mark 1 with the Aim of Reducing the Aircraft’s Whole Life Cost Through Overcoming Obsolescence and Improving Reliability. in Addition, the Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight Programme will Increase Operational Capability Through the Introduction of Second Generation Infra Red Technology in the Modernised Target Acquisition and

Designation Sight and the Modernised Pilot’s Night Vision Sensor. the Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight, Pilot’s Night Vision Sensor and Target Acquisition and

Designation Sight Electronic Display and Control Upgrades are Already Fielded with the United States Army. the Improved Helmet Display and Sighting System for the 21st Century is Scheduled to be Fielded with the United States Army at a Later Date.

Trials of the Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight Upgrade on British Army Apache Army Helicopter Mark 1s are Ongoing with Two Aircraft Undergoing Trials at

AgustaWestland Helicopters Ltd, Yeovil. a Further Aircraft Was Modified in Early 2008 to Ensure Compatibility with Operation HERRICK Theatre Entry Standard Modifications. Aviation Training International Ltd are also under Contract to Provide the Associated Upgrades to the Attack Helicopter Training System. Modification of the Wider Apache Army Helicopter Mk1 Fleet and the Enhancement of the Attack Helicopter Training System to Include Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight Training is on Schedule to Commence in the Last Quarter of 2008 to Support an in-Service Date of April 2009.

## 1b. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">critical to Achievement of ISD</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 1c. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>contractor(s)</Th>
<th>contract Scope</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>agustawestland Helicopters Ltd (Formally Westland Helicopters Ltd)</Td>
<td>assessment to InService</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>non-Competitive</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lockheed Martin Overseas Corporation</Td>
<td>assessment to InService</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>non-Competitive</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>aviation Training International Ltd</Td>
<td>assessment to InService</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>non-Competitive</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance Against Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
228
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
245
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-17
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Reasons for Variation from Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>inclusion of Contracted Out Services Value Added Tax in Total Forecast Cost Figure.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>inclusion of Projected Year End Accruals for the Remainder of the Project. This Change Reduces the Annual Net Assets Balance and the Subsequent Cost of Capital Charge.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>costs Associated with the Emulator Upgrade Now Included in Forecast Costs for the Modernised Target and Acquisition Designation Sight Project.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>saving Due to Aviation Training International Ltd Turret Upgrade Taking Place in United Kingdom Utilising Core Resource Already Costed for Against the Special Repair Agency, and not in United States as Previously Assumed.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2008</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Risk Provision Relating to Potential Impact of VAT Treatment Decision No Longer Required Following HM Revenue and Customs Decision.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>september 2007</Td>
<td>-24</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>confirmation Received from HM Revenue and Customs that Zero Rate of Value Added Tax Applies to this Upgrade</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>august 2007</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>increase in Forecast Costs to Reflect the Possibility that Value Added Tax “zero Rate” Might be Applied to this Upgrade, which Had Previously Been Assumed to be ‘zero Rated’ for VAT Purposes.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>the Increase is Due to Inclusion of Indirect Resource Departmental Expenditure Limit (Cost of Capital Charge) &amp; Inclusion Of</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>factor</Td>
<td>explanation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>£1m Sunk Costs on De-Risking Work.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-20</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>contracts Awarded Following Negotiation in 2004 with Westland Helicopters Ltd and to Aviation Training International Ltd for the Associated Training Update at Prices which Were less than the Pre-Contract Forecast.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-17</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</Th>
<th>
82
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of Peak Procurement Expenditure</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2008/2009
</Td>
<td>
2009/2010
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2e. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">unit Production Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>current</Td>
<td>at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
Current
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>70</Td>
<td>
70
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 78%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>isd Definition:</Th>
<th>
4 Aircraft Retrofitted with Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3b. Performance Against Approved in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast ISD</Td>
<td>
April 2009
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
December 2009
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation (Months)</Td>
<td>
-8
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3c. Reasons for Variation from Approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>joint Risk Analysis, Taking into Account Closure and Reduced Probability of a Number of Risks, Predicts a Most Likely in-Service Date of April 2009.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>following Commercial Negotiation that Took Longer than Anticipated, Contracts Were Awarded with Westland Helicopters Ltd and to Aviation Training International Ltd for the Associated Training Update. the Delay Has Resulted in the in-Service Date Being Delayed by 6 Months</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-12</Td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-8</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3d. Cost Resulting from ISD Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 4%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>type of Cost/Saving</Th>
<th>
Cost £m
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>saving £m</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
## 3e. Operational Impact of ISD Variation
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance Against Approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>forecast to be

Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>
Operational Capability – the User Shall be Provided with an Operational Capability not less than that Set Out in the Apache Army Helicopter Mk1 Concept of Use Throughout the Life of the Apache Army Helicopter Mk 1 Weapon System and Support Equipment.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</Td>
<td>
Operational Availability - The User Shall be Capable of Achieving not less than 75% of the Aircraft Operating Fleet Available (Fit for Purpose and in an Operable Condition) During Each Operational Day.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</Td>
<td>
Target Flying Rates - The User Shall be Able to Achieve the Annual Target Flying Rates as Defined in the 4 Customer Supplier Agreement Between Chief Defence Logistics and Commander in Chief Land.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</Td>
<td>
Sustainability - The User Shall be Able to Sustain the Apache Army Helicopter Mk1 Weapon System and Support Equipment in Accordance with the Force Elements at Readiness and Concurrency Assumptions.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</Td>
<td>
Interoperability - The User Shall be Able to Operate and Support the Apache Army Helicopter Mk1 Weapon System and Support Equipment Concurrent with all UK Service Helicopters.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</Td>
<td>
Airworthiness - The User Shall be Able to Operate the Apache Army Helicopter Mk1Weapon System and Support Equipment in Accordance with all Extant Airworthiness Standards and Policies.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td>
Health and Safety - The User Shall be Able to Operate and Support the Apache Army Helicopter Mk1 Weapon System and Support Equipment in Accordance with Extant Health and Safety Policies and Regulations.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
100%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 4b. Reasons for Variation Against Approved Key Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Requirement</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP to MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight Project Was Initiated as a Result of the Assessment Phase of the Attack Helicopter Support Reappraisal Project. the Attack Helicopter Support Reappraisal Project Sought to Achieve £738m (Hard Target) Whole Life Cost Saving over the Service Life of the Aircraft to 2031. the Attack Helicopter Support Reappraisal Project Was Structured in Two Phases, an Analysis of “spend to Save” Investment Options and an Improved Future Support Arrangement. the Modernised Target Acquisition and Designation Sight Programme Was Estimated to Contribute Whole Life Cost Savings of
£464m.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (Outturn Prices)</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
<th>
Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement Expenditure
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>actual Cost</Td>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>
3%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
1%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
</Colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>date of Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
September 2004
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date of Initial Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
November 1999
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>length of Assessment Phase [months]</Td>
<td>
58
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5d. Cost Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (Outturn Prices)</Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Forecast at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
232
</Td>
<td>
245
</Td>
<td>
245
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>expected Envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
133
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5e. ISD Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Acceptable
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Forecast ISD at Main Gate
</Td>
<td>
August 2008
</Td>
<td>
December 2008
</Td>
<td>december 2009</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Envelope Within which Capability Was Expected to be Available at Initial Gate
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
April 2006
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

THIS PAGE is INTENTIONALLY BLANK
