---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Typhoon
Page_from: 164.0
Page_to: 190.0
Project_label: Typhoon
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_164_190.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore Lincoln Taylor (Air Capability)
</Td>
<td>january 2015 December 2018</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects / Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon Future Capability Programme
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Active Electronic Scanned Array
</Td>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Meteor Integration
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Storm Shadow Integration
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Brimstone 2 Integration
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Typhoon

Typhoon, Formerly Known as Eurofighter, is an Agile Multi-Role Combat Aircraft. Originally Designed Primarily, but not Exclusively, for Air Superiority, the Aircraft is also Capable of Delivering a Precision Ground Attack Capability. Typhoon Has the Flexibility to Respond to the Uncertain Demands of the Current and Evolving Strategic Environment.

The Aircraft is Being Developed, Produced and Supported in a Collaborative Project with Germany, Italy and Spain. the Project is Managed on Behalf of the Four Partner Nations (PN) by the NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency (NETMA). to Date, Contracts Have Been Placed for the RAF to Receive 160 Aircraft in Three Tranches. Typhoon Support is Being Delivered Through the Letting of Long-Term Contracts Against Five Areas of Support.

Typhoon Future Capability Programme

The Typhoon Future Capability Programme will Provide Enhancements to the Typhoon Aircraft, both in the Air-to-Air and Air-to-Surface Roles, to Sustain the RAF’s Typhoon Fleet’s Multi-Role Capabilities.

The First Phase of the Future Capability Programme, under a Contract Signed in March 2007, will Integrate Paveway IV and the Litening III Laser Designator Pod Onto Tranche 2 Aircraft from 2012 Onwards as Well as Interoperability Upgrades without which Those Aircraft will be Neither Compliant with New Civil Airspace Regulations nor Interoperable with Key Coalition Allies. It will also Provide the Human Machine Interface for Multi-Role Operations, Allowing Typhoon to Fulfil Air-to-Air and Air-to-Surface Operations with the Current, Planned and Projected Weapons.

The Department will Continue to Develop the Typhoon Capability Incrementally in Line with the Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Typhoon

Pre-Development, which Commenced with the Approval of the Feasibility Study in 1984, Comprised a Number of Activities. Following Early Concept Studies, and Various Efforts at Establishing a Collaborative Programme, There Were Two Key Typhoon Demonstration Activities Completed by the UK Before Development: The Experimental Aircraft Programme, an Airframe Programme Primarily Aimed at Proving the Feasibility of the Typhoon Unstable Flight Control Concepts, and the XG40 Engine Demonstrator Programme at Rolls Royce. the Results of These Demonstrators and their Associated Studies, Together with the Results of Similar Work Within the Other Nations Were Harmonised in a Definition, Refinement and Risk Reduction Phase that Ran from the End of 1985 when Four Nations Signed the Initial Memorandum of Understanding, until 1988 when the Development Contract Was Signed.

Typhoon Future Capability Programme - Phase 1

The Approval Process for Typhoon Tranche 2 Noted the Intention to Develop the Capability of the Aircraft Through Life and Envisaged an Incremental Route to the Acquisition of Future Capability Enhancements. the Assessment Phase Found Technology and Integration Were not a Major Challenge and that Risks Mostly Pertained to the Commercial and Industrial Aspects of the Programme. These Have Been Addressed and the MOD Approvals Process for the Project Was Accelerated to Combine Initial Gate, Including the Cost Already Incurred During the Assessment Phase, and Main Gate in Order to Maximise Efficiency Across the Four PN.

The UK Has Embarked on an Extended Assessment Phase to Assess Technologies that Would Meet Its Requirement for an Electronically Scanned Radar to Replace the Existing Mechanically Scanned Radar. the Embodiment of this Technology on to Typhoon Aircraft will Provide a Considerable Operational and Export Enhancement for the Aircraft and Add to the Growing Formidable Array of Weapons Operationally Available.

## A.3. Project History

Typhoon Has Been in Service with the RAF Since 2003 and Commenced Operational Duties for the First Time in June 2007 when it Assumed Quick Reaction Alert Responsibility for Defence of UK Airspace. Deployable Air Defence Operational Status Was Achieved on 1 January 2008, which Enables Typhoon to Deploy Worldwide on Air-to-Air Missions. Typhoon Was Declared to NATO in the Deployable Air Defence – Advanced Role on 1 April 2008. Typhoon Assumed Quick Reaction Alert Responsibility for Defence of South Atlantic Islands Airspace in September 2009, Taking over from Tornado F3.

The Existing Advanced Air-to-Air Missile Capability on Tranche 1 Aircraft Has Been Complemented by the Integration of an Initial Precision Air-to-Surface Capability, which Was Declared Combat Ready by the RAF in July 2008. This Air-to-Surface Capability Enabled Declaration of Multi-Role Status and is in Advance of more Comprehensive Air-to-Surface Capability Through the Typhoon Future Capability Programme for Tranche 2 Aircraft.

Deliveries of Tranche 2 Aircraft Commenced in October 2008. the Original Typhoon Fleet Numbers Required (232 Aircraft) Were Established in the 1990s. Current Fleet Planning and Assumptions to Meet Defence Requirements Have Determined the Aircraft Numbers and Capabilities Required Now (160 Aircraft). the Contract for the Third Tranche, Signed in July 2009, Represents the Best Solution for the UK in Balancing Current Military Requirement and International Obligations Against Affordability. the UK Has Retained the Option to Order Further Aircraft. Deliveries of Tranche 3 Aircraft Commenced in December 2013.

The Typhoon Availability Service (TAS) Contract with BAE Systems, Signed in March 2009 Formally Commenced in September 2009. the Engine Availability Service Contract with Rolls-Royce (PSOP 3) Was Signed in December 2009. These Contracts are Part of the Strategy to Transform Support Arrangements Through Partnering with UK Industry.

Number 6 Squadron, the First Typhoon Fighter Squadron in Scotland, Officially Formed at RAF Leuchars on 6 September 2010. the Typhoon Force Assumed Quick Reaction Alert (North) Air Defence Responsibility from RAF Leuchars in March 2011. the Outcome of the Review into Basing Was Announced by the Secretary of State for Defence in July 2011 and Concluded with the Closure of Leuchars as an Air Force Base and Move the Typhoon Squadron to RAF Lossiemouth, Redeploying Aircraft from 2013 Onwards.

A Proposal Was Made in May 2010 by the Eurofighter GmbH Consortium to Slow Down the Rate of Production of Typhoon Tranche 3a Aircraft for all Four Partner Nations. the Typhoon Partner Nations Agreed to this Proposal in July 2011. the Agreement on Production Slowdown Aims to Protect the Industrial Capacity of the Eurofighter Partner Companies to Service Export Orders for Typhoon, While Meeting the Requirements of the PN. in March 2011, Typhoon Aircraft Were Deployed Overseas for the First Time on Contingent Operations, in Support of the Coalition Plan to Enforce United Nations Resolution 1973 (Libya).

Following Typhoon’s First Overseas Contingent Operational Deployment in March 2011 on Operation ELLAMY, it Was Used Initially in an Air Defence Role and then as a Ground Attack Aircraft Against Targets Varying from Tactical to Strategic. the Aircraft Consistently Demonstrated Exceptional Levels of Reliability, Performance, Accuracy and Overall Cost-Effectiveness over and above the MOD’s Very High Expectations.

Typhoon Aircraft Deployed on Operation ELLAMY Returned to the UK in September 2011.

In June 2011 the Ministers of the Four PN Signed an Agreement which Signalled their Intent to Develop an Operational Requirement for an Electronically Scanned Radar for the Eurofighter Programme which Would Aim to Introduce a Harmonised New Radar Onto the Aircraft, also Enhancing the Exportability of the Aircraft to New Overseas Customers.

Typhoon Capability Upgrades Continue to be Progressed and Capitalise on the Aircrafts Growth Potential, Demonstrated During the Early Stages of Its Operational Life as a Multi-Role Air Defence Platform in the 21st Century. Planned Upgrades Include; the Integration of the Meteor Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile, Following Its Successful Launch from a Typhoon Aircraft in 2012; Continuing Work to Mature the Technology Required to Replace the Existing Mechanically Scanned Radar with a New Electronically Scanned Radar.

An Announcement Was Made December 2012 for the Contract Between BAES and the Sultanate of Oman for the Delivery of 12 Typhoon Aircraft to the Royal Omani Air Force. This Has Increased the Number of Typhoon Users to Seven.

Under the Programme Known as Retrofit 2, 43 Typhoon Aircraft Have Been Upgraded to the Tranche 1 Block 5 Standard, which Includes Installation of the Forward Looking Infra-Red System, Sensor Fusion and the Enhancement of Air-to-Air Capability.

Typhoon Undertook it First ‘major’ Maintenance Interval after Completing 1,600 Flying Hours. the ‘major’ Maintenance Programme Typically Takes Around Nine Months per Aircraft to Complete and is Carried Out under the TAS Contract at RAF Coningsby.

Typhoon Played a Key Role During the 2012 Olympics by Providing Air Defence Capability when They Were Deployed to RAF Northolt to Protect London as Part of Operation Olympic Guardian. the Aircraft also Took Part in Fly Pasts over London During the Diamond Jubilee Celebrations.

The First Phase of the Future Capability Programme Has Shown Good Progress Now that the Project Schedule Has Been Re-Baselined, Through Joint Working Between the Department and Industry. This Accommodated the 18 Month Delay which Was Highlighted in Major Projects Report 2012.

The Typhoon Front Line Fleet Continues to Build with Well over Half of the Contracted Deliveries of 160 Aircraft in Three Tranches Now in Service with the RAF.

The Governments Continued Commitment to the Growth in Typhoon Capability Was Marked when the

£130m Contract Between NETMA and Eurofighter GMBh to Integrate the Meteor Missile System Onto Typhoon Was Signed at the Paris Airshow in June 2013, During a Ceremony Attended by Ministers of the PN of the Typhoon/Eurofighter Programme.

The Typhoon Future Capabilities (FCP1) Programme Introduces Precision Air-to-Surface Bombing Capability on Tranche 2 and Tranche 3 Standard of Aircraft. the Programme is Delivered in Two Sequential Phases, the First of which (P1Ea) Was Accepted into Service with the RAF (1 Squadron) in December 2013. the Precision Bombing Capability is Provided Principally via the Integration of Paveway IV Bomb and Laser Designator Pod in Service Acceptance Followed an Earlier Successful Test Firing of this Weapon in July 2013.

The Planning for Integration of Further Capability Upgrades under the Wider FCP Programme Includes

Storm Shadow, Meteor and Additional Air to Ground Weapons. the United Kingdom, along with the Other PN, are Jointly Committed to Integrate an Active Electronic Scanned Array (AESA) Radar on to Typhoon and We are Working Closely with Industry to Finalise Arrangements for Bringing this Capability into Service, Subject to the Usual Approvals Processes. the Addition of this Capability will Further Enhance both the Operational Capability and the Exportability of this Formidable Aircraft, which is Already in Service with the Air Forces of 6 Nations.

In November 2013 the Ministers of the Eurofighter/Typhoon Nations Instigated a Programme that Underlined their Collective Commitment to Improve the Working Relationships and Create more Efficient and Agile Working Practices to Build on and Improve a Programme of European Transformation.

The Typhoon Fleet Continued to Grow as Planned, with 117 Aircraft Delivered to the RAF by the End of March 2013. the Last of the Tranche 2 Aircraft and the First of the 40 New Tranche 3a Aircraft Were Delivered at the End of December 2013.

The Department Extended the TAS Support Contract for a Further Year in December 2013. Throughout 2013 and into 2014 the Department Continued to Get to Grips with Cost Control for Typhoon Support, by Contracting Accounting Consultants to Conduct a ‘deep Dive’ into the £13bn Support Budget to Ensure it Remains under Control and Affordable over the Life of the Aircraft Through to It’s Planned Out of Service Date (OSD) of 2030. the Combination of this Activity and Ministerially Endorsed European Transformation Programme Underlines the Governments Commitment to Continued Cost Control and the Long-Term Affordability and Exportability of Typhoon.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

The Governments Continued Commitment to the Growth of Typhoon Capability Was Marked by the Signing of Two Key Weapon Integration Agreements During the Period. a £120m Agreement Was Signed at the Farnborough International Air Show in July 2014 to Integrate the Storm Shadow Missiles Onto Typhoon. Storm Shadow will Provide Long-Range-Air-to-Surface Capability and will be Fitted to Typhoon Tranche 2 and 3 Aircraft. This Was Followed by the £165m Contract for the Typhoon Phase 3 Enhancements (P3E) Programme, which Was Awarded in February 2015. the P3E Programme will Deliver a Number of Upgrades to the UK’s Typhoon Tranche 2 and 3 Mission and Maintenance Systems and Includes the Integration of the Brimstone 2 Weapon System that will Introduce a Short Range, Low Collateral Damage Weapon Capability Designed Specifically to Combat Fast Moving Surface Targets. It is Anticipated that both Storm Shadow and Brimstone 2 will be Ready for Service with the RAF in 2018.

The Typhoon Future Capabilities (FCP1) Programme Introduces Precision Air-to-Surface Bombing Capability Onto Tranche 2 and Tranche 3 Aircraft. the Second of Two Sequential Phases (P1Eb) Was Delivered into Service with the RAF in July 2014 and Declared Operational in April 2015. the Precision Bombing Capability is Provided Principally Through the Integration of the Paveway IV Bomb and Laser Designator Pod.

In September 2014, Typhoon Aircraft of 1 (Fighter) Squadron Relocated from RAF Leuchars to RAF Lossiemouth. Along with 6 Squadron, They Provide Quick Reaction Alert (QRA) Cover for the North of the UK, Together with QRA South, Based at RAF Coningsby. from 2015, Leuchars will Become Home to the Army.

An £800m Contract for the Development of a New Electronic Radar System for Typhoon Was Awarded in November 2014. the Contract, which Followed the UK’s Signing of a £72m Technology De-Risking and Demonstration
‘extended Assessment Phase’ with BAES in July 2014; Marks the Next Stage in the Full Development of an Active Electronically Scanned Array (AESA) Radar Capability for Typhoon. the Introduction of an AESA Radar will Support New Mission Capabilities for Typhoon, Through Simultaneous Multirole Air-to-Air and Air-to-Ground Tracking of Targets with Increased Fidelity and Range, Whilst Utilising the Radio Frequency Spectrum for Electronic Warfare.

The Typhoon Fleet Continues to Grow as Planned, with 127 Aircraft Delivered to the RAF by the End of March 2015. in December 2014 Typhoon Tranche 3 Release to Service (RTS) Was Declared. the 40 Tranche 3a Aircraft will be Delivered to the RAF by 2018, and along with the 67 Tranche 2 Aircraft, will be the Core of the Typhoon Fleet Through to It’s Out of Service Date.

In December 2014 the Department Extended the TAS Contract for a Further 15 Months, to Better Align Its Future Renewal with the International Spares and Repairs Contracts which Support It. the Contract Delivers Aircraft Depth Maintenance to the RAF Typhoon Force, a Spares and Repairs Management Service, RAF Aircrew and Ground Crew Training and an Engineering/Technical Resolution Service, Ensuring the Availability of the RAF’s Typhoon Fleet to Meet the Military Commitments.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Typhoon is Intended to be a Cornerstone of UK Air Defence and the Aircraft will be Pivotal to the Delivery of Standing Home Commitments. Having Replaced Jaguar in the Ground Attack Role and with Future Reductions in Other Aircraft Types, Loss of Typhoon Would Reduce the UK's Ground-Attack and Air Superiority Capabilities.

## A.6. Associated Projects

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>eurojet Turbo GmbH Engine Consortium

Comprising: Avio (Formerly FIAT

Avio), ITP, MTU, Rolls Royce</Td>
<td>
Development
</Td>
<td>firm Price (Avio, ITP, MTU) Fixed Price (Rolls Royce) for Propulsion Systems</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value of which Amounts to some 10% of Overall Value of the Prime Contract.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Typhoon
</Th>
<th>eurofighter GmbH Airframe Consortium Comprising: Alenia, BAE Systems, Cassidian (Formerly EADS(CASA) and

EADS(Deutschland)
</Th>
<th>
Development
</Th>
<th>fixed Price for Airframe and Equipments and Target Cost Incentive Arrangement for Aircraft Equipment Integration. Following a Breach of the Limit of Contractor Liability Provisions the Price Elements for Airframe and Equipments Have Been Converted to a Limit of Liability Cost Reimbursement without Profit.</Th>
<th>
Non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value of which Amounts to some 30% of the Overall Value of the Prime Contract.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon
</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH

Airframe Consortium

(See Details under Development above).</Td>
<td>
Production Investment/Pro Duction
</Td>
<td>overall Maximum Prices for Production Investment and Production of Airframes for all 232 UK Aircraft. (Fixed Price for Production of 1st and 2nd Tranche Airframe). Fixed Prices for all Production, Investment and Production of Aircraft Equipment.</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value of which Amounts to some 10% of the Overall Value of the Prime Contract.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon
</Td>
<td>eurojet Turbo GmbH Engine Consortium (See Details under Development above).</Td>
<td>
Production Investment/Pro Duction
</Td>
<td>overall Maximum Prices for Production Investment and Production of Engines for all 232 UK Aircraft. Firm Price (Avio, ITP, MTU) Fixed Price (Rolls Royce) for Tranche 1, Tranche 2 and Tranche 3 Engine Production Investment and Production.</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value of which Amounts to some 10% of the Overall Value of the Prime Contract.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon Future Capability Programme
</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH Airframe Consortium Comprising: Alenia, BAE Systems,

Cassidian (Formerly
</Td>
<td>
Design, Development, Demonstration, Qualification and Production
</Td>
<td>overall Max Price to be Converted to UK Firm Price</Td>
<td>
Collaborative. Noncompetitive but with International Competitive Subcontract Elements.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>eads(CASA) and EADS(Deutschland)</Td>
<td>clearance of the First Batch of Enhancements.</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>meteor Integration</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH Airframe Consortium</Td>
<td>meteor Missile Integration on to Typhoon</Td>
<td>
Maximum Price
</Td>
<td>non Competitive</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>storm Shadow Integration</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH Airframe Consortium</Td>
<td>storm Shadow Missile Integration on to Typhoon</Td>
<td>
Maximum Price
</Td>
<td>single Source NonCompetitive</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH Airframe Consortium</Td>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration on to Typhoon</Td>
<td>
Maximum Price
</Td>
<td>single Source NonCompetitive</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">typhoon's Partnered Support Strategy Was Originally Approved in 2000. Its Principles Were Reinforced by the Results of a 2004 Support Review. the Partnered Support Strategy - Referred to as Typhoon Future Support - will be Delivered Through the Letting of Long-Term Contracts Against Five Areas of Support Through TAS on BAE Systems; the Propulsion Availability Service PSOP on Rolls Royce; for Avionics (Spares Provisioning and Component Repair) via the NETMA; and for International Technical Support Services, also via the NETMA.valuable Experience Has Already Been Gained Through the Letting of Incremental Contracts to Transform Typhoon Support, the First of which Was the Initial Phase of the Engine Availability Contract with Rolls Royce in 2005. Work is Now Well Underway to Implement Changes to the Contractual Framework for Support by Replacing Eleven Legacy Contracts with Four New more Efficient Contracts, as a Part of a Wider European Transformation Programme Jointly Introduced by PN and Eurofighter Gmbh. Two of the Four Contracts Were Let in 2012 and Work is Now Underway to Let the Remaining Two. the UK Has also Developed a Series of Managed Workstreams, Focussing on the Support Costs of the Engine, Avionics Engineering Sustainment and Improved Maintenance Processes. Progress Against These Workstreams Has Continued During the Year with Efficiencies Now Starting to be Realised in Maintenance of the Aircraft. All of These Workstreams are Specifically Designed to Manage Support Expenditure so that it Stays Within the Current Approval Limit over the Life of the Aircraft. the TAS Contract Was Extended for an Initial One Year from December 2013, with a Further 15 Month Extension Following in December 2014.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Availability Service</Td>
<td>bae Systems</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>target Cost Plus Incentive Fee</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>engine Availability Service</Td>
<td>rolls Royce</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>target Cost Plus Incentive Fee</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spares Provisioning</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH and Eurojet GmbH</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>fixed Price</Td>
<td>
International Noncompetitive Based on Commitments under Memoranda of Understanding, with International Workshare of Subcontracting also Determined by Those Memoranda
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>component Repair</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH and Eurojet GmbH</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>fixed Price</Td>
<td>
International Noncompetitive Based on Commitments under Memoranda of Understanding, with International Workshare of Subcontracting also Determined by Those Memoranda
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technical Support Services</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH and Eurojet GmbH</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>fixed Price</Td>
<td>international Noncompetitive Based on Commitments under Memoranda of Understanding, with International Workshare of Subcontracting also Determined by Those Memoranda</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>87</Td>
<td>78</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>39</Td>
<td>39</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>active Electronic Scanned Array</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name          | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Typhoon                             |                          | 15173                 | 15348                     |
| Typhoon Future Capability Programme | 349                      | 403                   | 435                       |
| Meteor Integration                  | 122                      | 130                   | 137                       |
| Storm Shadow Integration            | 164                      | 172                   | 199                       |
| Brimstone 2 Integration             | 177                      | 186                   | 197                       |
| Total (£m)                      |                          | 16064             | 16316                 |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>15173</Td>
<td>17341</Td>
<td>+2168</Td>
<td>-202</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>403</Td>
<td>401</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>meteor Integration</Td>
<td>130</Td>
<td>108</Td>
<td>-22</Td>
<td>-15</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>storm Shadow Integration</Td>
<td>172</Td>
<td>153</Td>
<td>-19</Td>
<td>-19</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration</Td>
<td>186</Td>
<td>186</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>16064</Td>
<td>18189</Td>
<td>2125</Td>
<td>-238</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Typhoon (in-Year)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>dec-14</Td>
<td>
-234
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>
Reversal of Historic Accrual Values Following a Detailed Contract Reconciliation Exercise Between MoD and KPMG.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
Mar-15
</Td>
<td>
+17
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>
Identification of Additional Waivers &amp; Retentions Against Tranche 1 and Main Development Contracts. (FY14/15)
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
Mar-15
</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Additional Demand for Emergent Safety Related Tasks (FUSION Contract) FY14/15.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
Mar-15
</Td>
<td>
+7
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>
Tranche 3 Revised Support and GFX Costs Forecast Based on Latest Estimates.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Mar-15

+2

Receipts

Review of SALAM CEL Receipts

Resulting in Maturing View of

Anticip

Ated Level of Receipt.

Net Variation (£m)

-

202

### B.3.1.2 Typhoon (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-109
</Td>
<td>
-109
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="3">
MPR 13
</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">
-19
</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td>
Change is Associate Project
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-13
</Td>
<td>change in Capability Requirement</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
MPR 12
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
-69
</Td>
<td>
+27
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-96
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="3">
MPR11
</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">
+22
</Td>
<td>
-55
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-9
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
+86
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 10
</Td>
<td>
+2457
</Td>
<td>
+2457
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 9
</Td>
<td>
-38
</Td>
<td>
-38
</Td>
<td>
Inflation
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="7">
Historic<sup>1</Sup>
</Td>
<td Rowspan="7">
+126
</Td>
<td>
+1045
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
+346
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-1065
</Td>
<td>change in Capability Requirement</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
+41
</Td>
<td>
Inflation
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-102
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-136
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
+2370
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.3 Typhoon Future Capability Programme (in-Year)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

-2

Accounting

Adjustments

And Re-

Definitions

Review of Legacy Contract Values

Net Variation (£m)

-

2

### B.3.1.4 Typhoon Future Capability Programme (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-28
</Td>
<td>
-28
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 13
</Td>
<td>
-11
</Td>
<td>
-11
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 12
</Td>
<td>
+22
</Td>
<td>
+22
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="3">
MPR11
</Td>
<td Rowspan="3">
-4
</Td>
<td>
-8
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 10
</Td>
<td>
+8
</Td>
<td>
+8
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 9
</Td>
<td>
+7
</Td>
<td>
+7
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 8
</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td>
+6
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.5 Meteor Integration (in-Year)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

-18

International

Collaboration

Interna

Tional Collaboration in

Programme Resulting in Reduction of

Costs to the UK

Mar-15

+3

Technical

Factors

Additional Embodiment and

Concurrency Costs

Net Variation (£m)

-

15

### B.3.1.6 Meteor Integration (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-6
</Td>
<td>
-6
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-6
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.7 Storm Shadow Integration (in-Year)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

-19

Technical

Factors

Reduction Driven by Decision for Joint

Entry into Service with Brimstone

System (P3e Contract) - Driving

Savings Through Joint ILS and

Synthetic Training.

Net Variation (£m)

-

19

### B.3.1.8 Brimstone 2 Integration – N/a

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase – N/a B.4 Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>13100</Td>
<td>12532</Td>
<td>-568</Td>
<td>-369</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost

### B.4.1.1 Typhoon (in-Year)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Jun-14

-345

Budgetary

Factors

Results from Instigated Full Bottom Up

Review of Support Cost Model (Deep

Dive Part 2)

\-

MoD and KPMG.

Mar-15

+18

International

Collaboration

Ame

Ndment to Workshare Allocations

Reconciliation by NETMA) under

(

International Agreement - Funding

Key Changes to NETMA Contracts.

Mar-15

-42

Accounting

Adjustments

And Re-

Definitions

Reversal of Historic Accrual Values

Following Reconciliation of PC4

Contract (MoD/KPMG), Alongside an

In Year Adjustment to Reflect Revised

Accounting Policy for 'Forecast

Delivery Dates' on PSOP Contract

Versus Order Dates.

Net Variation (£m)

-

369

### B.4.1.2 Typhoon (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-199
</Td>
<td>
-199
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-199
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.2 Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Cost Variations –
N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>120</Td>
<td>136</Td>
<td>256</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>16663</Td>
<td>286</Td>
<td>16949</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>4738</Td>
<td>554</Td>
<td>5292</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>21521</Td>
<td>976</Td>
<td>22497</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main

Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment

Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>(Legacy Project) Pre SMART</Td>
<td>november 1987</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>combined Initial and Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
January 2007
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>active Electronic Scanned Array<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref"
Id="Fnref1" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>meteor Integration<a Href="Fn2" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref2"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>2</Sup></A></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>april 2013</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>storm Shadow Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
October 2013
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
February 2015
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1"><a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
<li Id="Fn2">no Assessment Phase – Project Approved at Main Gate.<a Href="Fnref2" Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted For</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
December 1998
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>january 2012</Td>
<td>june 2012</Td>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>active Electronic Scanned Array<sup>1</Sup></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>meteor Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td>
November 2017
</Td>
<td>june 2018</Td>
<td>june 2018</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>storm Shadow Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td>june 2018</Td>
<td>august 2018</Td>
<td>july 2019</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td>april 2017</Td>
<td>
December 2018
</Td>
<td>
September 2019
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
In-Service Date - Date of Delivery of First Aircraft to the RAF. Initial Operating Capability - When Squadron Pilots Begin Training They Start to Contribute to Defence Capability.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>
In-Service Date - Delivery to the RAF of Autonomous Precision Air-to-Surface Military Capability in 12 Tranche 2 Aircraft. Initial Operating Capability - The Same as in-Service Date.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>meteor Integration</Td>
<td>
12 Aircraft or One Squadron Fully Meteor Capable
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>storm Shadow Integration</Td>
<td>
First Front Line Unit Operational
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td>
First Front Line Typhoon Squadron Fully Enabled Pan DLOD to Employ Brimstone 2.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
December 1998
</Td>
<td>june 2003</Td>
<td>+54</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>june 2012</Td>
<td>december 2013</Td>
<td>+18</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>meteor Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td>june 2018</Td>
<td>june 2018</Td>
<td>nil</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>storm Shadow<sup>2</Sup>
Integration</Td>
<td>august 2018</Td>
<td>august 2018</Td>
<td>nil</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration</Td>
<td>
December 2018
</Td>
<td>december 2018</Td>
<td>nil</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Typhoon (in-Year) – N/a

### C.3.3.2 Typhoon (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 31%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>
Annual Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 02
</Td>
<td>
+12
</Td>
<td>
+12
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
MPR 99
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
+42
</Td>
<td>
+20
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
+22
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+54
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.3 Typhoon Future Capability Programme (in-Year) – N/a

### C.3.3.4 Typhoon Future Capability Programme (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 31%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>
Annual Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (+/- Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 12
</Td>
<td>
+18
</Td>
<td>
+18
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+18
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.5 Meteor Integration (in-Year) – N/a

### C.3.3.6 Storm Shadow Integration (in-Year) – N/a

### C.3.3.7 Brimstone 2 Integration (in-Year) – N/a

## C.3.4 Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation

Project/Increment

Name

Date

£m (+ Cost / -

Saving)

Category

Reason for

Expenditure or

Saving

Support Costs of

Current Equipment

Historic

+1075

Cost of Running

On Tornado and

Jaguar

Other

Historic

-861

Estimated

Support Costs for

Typhoon not

Incurred

Total

+214

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 76%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
Key Improvements in Capability not Realised until Revised ISD Are: i) Agility and all Altitude Performance; Ii) Autonomous Detection, Identification and Multiple Engagement of Air to Air Targets;
Iii) Human Computer Interface to Reduce Operator Workload; Iv) Multi Role Capability;
v) Survivability Through Superior Airframe and Equipment Performance;
Vi) Low Mean Time Between Failures. the 54 Month Delay Has Been Mitigated to a Small Extent by Compressing the Entry into Service Period, but the Net Effect is a Delay of Four Years.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>
Delays to Future Capability Programme 1 Does not Adversely Impact on the Typhoon Force Build.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
A Declaration by Head of Capability (Theatre Airspace) that the Full Strength Military Capability Has Been Achieved.
</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>
A Declaration by Head of Capability (Theatre Airspace) that Swing-Role Military Capability Has Been Achieved.
</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>meteor Integration</Td>
<td>
Full Tranche 2 &amp; 3 Fleet Provisioned for a Four Missile Meteor Fit
</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>storm Shadow Integration</Td>
<td>
The Full Typhoon Tranche 2 and Tranche 3 Fleet Enabled for Storm Shadow.
</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2 Integration<sup>2</Sup></Td>
<td>
The Full Typhoon Tranche 2 and Tranche 3 Fleet Enabled for Brimstone 2.
</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract

## C.5.1 Scope of Support / Training / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 76%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Availability Service</Td>
<td>
Aircraft Platform Availability Service Integrating on-Shore Support Activities with the Outputs of Mandated International Contracts
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>engine Availability Service</Td>
<td>
National Engine Spares Inclusive Availability Contract with International Support Contracts
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spares Provisioning</Td>
<td>
International Spares Provisioning Contract under the Terms Established in Memoranda of Understanding.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>component Repair</Td>
<td>
International Component Repair Contract under the Terms Established in Memoranda of Understanding.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technical Support Service</Td>
<td>
International Contract for the Provision of Technical Support Services and Advice under the Terms Established in Memoranda of Understanding.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Contract Go-Live Date – N/a

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.3 Progress Against Approved End of Support / Training / PFI Contract Date – N/a

### C.5.3.1 End of Contract Date Variation – N/a

## C.5.4 Other Costs Resulting from Support Cost Variation – N/a

## C.5.5 Operational Impact of Support / Training / PFI Support Contract Variation – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 31%" />
<col Style="Width: 42%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
81
</Td>
<td>
Storm Shadow Integration
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
78
</Td>
<td>
Meteor Integration
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
N/a in MPR15
</Td>
<td>
Brimstone 2 Integration
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Typhoon Platform, Typhoon Future Capability Programme and Associated Weapons.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
The Timely Provision of Suitably Qualified and Experienced Personnel to Deliver Defence Outputs, Now and in the Future.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
The Provision of Maintenance and Support to the Typhoon Fleet, Including the Operation of Support Activities Such as Supply Chain.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
The Acquisition, Development, Management and Disposal of all Fixed, Permanent Buildings and Structures, Land, Utilities and Facility Management Services in Support of the Typhoon Capability.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
The Timely Provision of Sufficient, Capable and Motivated Personnel to Deliver the Typhoon Capability, Now and in the Future.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Doctrine is an Expression of the Principles by which Military Forces Guide the Use of Typhoon.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Relates to the Operational and Nonoperational Organisational Relationships of People. It Typically Includes Military Force Structures, MOD Civilian Organisational Structures and Defence Contractors Providing Support.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
The Timely Provision of Sufficient, Capable IT and Information Systems to Deliver Typhoon Capability. It Includes the Production and Validation of all Mission Support Data for Operations, Trials and Training.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>mpr15</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>delivery of the Tornado / Typhoon Transition in Terms of Seamless Capability Management. This is to be Brigaded under One Delivery Milestone for 2018.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>mpr15</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>adequate Synthetic Training Provision Remains a Risk for Achievement of Air Force Board Standing Objectives.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>an Adequate Synthetic Training System is Expected to be in Pace and on Time.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>sufficient Personnel are Expected to be in Place for Next Major Capability Milestone.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>logistic Support Solution Expected to be in Place for Next Major Capability Milestone.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>generation and Validation of Mission Data for Elements of the Weapon System is Heavily Reliant on Technical Support. with Mission Data Production Reliant on Interim Industry Equipment, and Personnel Additional Future Investment will be Required.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>national Support Arrangements are Working Well, but There are Problems with the Timely Supply of Spares and Repair of Equipment under the Collaborative Support Contracts which are Contributing to the RAF Failing to Achieve Its Flying Hours.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>there is Risk that Synthetic Training will not be Provided Concurrently with the Future Capability Programme 1 Aircraft Standard, Across the Typhoon Force.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>it is Now Assessed that this DLOD will Deliver Capability to Meet the Redefined Future Capability Programme 1 in Service Date of December 2013.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>equipment</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>the Approved ISD of June 2012 for Future Capability Programme 1 will not be Achieved and is Likely to be Delayed by over 12 Months. a Combination of Technical Complexity, Partner Nation Disagreement on a Synthetic Training Solution and Delays in Agreement of an International Support Arrangement Have Caused the Delay. the Situation is Summarised in an Information Note Released on 2nd April 2012. the ISD for Typhoon Surface-Attack Capability Was Rebaselined as Part of the Strategic Defence and Security Review to 2015. Consequently, the Delay to the Delivery of Future Capability Programme 1 DLODs Does not Affect Typhoon's Ability to Deliver Defence Final Output.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Delivery of the Future Capability Programme 1 Logistics DLOD is Dependent on the Completion of the Future Capability Programme Product which is Delayed by over 12 Months (Information Note Released on 2nd April 2012 Refers). the ISD for Typhoon Surface-Attack Capability Was Rebaselined as Part of the Strategic Defence and Security Review to 2015. Consequently, the Delay to the Delivery of Future Capability Programme 1 DLODs Does not Affect Typhoon's Ability to Deliver Defence Final Output.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Delivery of the Future Capability Programme 1 Training DLOD is Dependent on the Completion of the Future Capability Programme Product which is Delayed by over 12 Months (Information Note Released on 2nd April 2012 Refers). the ISD for Typhoon Surface-Attack Capability Was Rebaselined as Part of the Strategic Defence and Security Review to 2015. Consequently, the Delay to the Delivery of Future Capability Programme 1 DLODs Does not Affect Typhoon's Ability to Deliver Defence Final Output.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>infrastructure</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>overall Performance is Good with Minor Issues Mainly Relating to the Second Operating Base at Leuchars. Minimum Infrastructure Was Provided Because the Timescale for Delivery Was Short (Approximately Two Years) and some Mitigations are Still in Place. Furthermore, Funding for the Building for Synthetic Simulators Has Still not Been Approved.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>national Support Arrangements are Working Well, but There are Problems with the Timely Supply of Spares and Repair of Equipment under the Collaborative Support Contracts which are Contributing to the RAF Failing to Achieve Its Flying Hours.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>generation and Validation of Mission Data for Elements of the Weapon System Continues to Lag Aircraft Development. with Mission Data Production Reliant on Interim Industry Equipment, Additional Future Investment will be Required.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors and

Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>a Planning Round 2009 Measure Restricted the Annual Flying Task Resource Available to Support Flying Training for Front Line Pilots, Capping the Deliverable Capability; Pilots are Now Resourced to Ensure Minimum Safe Sustainable Flying Rate. Eurofighter Aircrew Synthetic Training Aids also Failed to Deliver Software Upgrades to Programme Timescales; Synthetic Multi-Role Training Capability Has Been Delayed as a Result.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>redefinition</Td>
<td>the Equipment DLOD is not Now Considered "At Risk" as the Previous Assessment Was Based on an in-Year Perspective, Rather than a Forecast of Progress Towards Achieving Full Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>redefinition</Td>
<td>the Logistics DLOD is not Now Considered "At Risk" as the Previous Assessment Was Based on an in-Year Perspective, Rather than a Forecast of Progress Towards Achieving Full Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>generation of Sufficient Technical Manpower to Fulfil the Combined Requirements of the Typhoon Availability Service and Those Necessary to Man the Front Line Could not be Met, Largely Due to a Global Shortfall of Aircraft Engineering Technicians.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>there are Currently Insufficient Resources Available at the Right Time to Integrate Weapons Systems, Such as BVRAAM, Onto the Typhoon Platform.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Requirement to Provide Additional Training as a Result of Exports Has Adversely Affected the UK’s Typhoon Training Capacity.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Requirement to Provide Additional Spares Provisioning as a Result of Exports Has Adversely Affected the UK’s Ability to Deliver Full Logistics Support.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Equipment Required to Generate, Verify and Validate Mission Dependent Data for Elements of the Weapons System Lags Aircraft Development by Up to 2 Years and is Currently not Fit for Purpose. Therefore, Mission Dependent Data Production is Reliant on Interim Industry Equipment which Does not Permit Validation or Verification Testing of this Data to MOD Quality Assurance Standards until January 2010 at the Earliest. Mitigations are in Place to Manage this Risk Against Typhoon’s Tasks over the Next 3 Years, but this Area will Require Further Investment as Typhoon’s Tasks Grow in Accordance with Extant Planning Assumptions.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1 Typhoon

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Take Off Distance
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Landing Distance
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Equipment,

Training, Logistics,

Personnel
</Td>
<td>
Attributable Failures per 1000 Flying Hours
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>equipment, Logistics</Td>
<td>
Life (Flying Hours)
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Sustained Minimum Turn Radii at Sea Level, Max Reheat
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Maximum Speed at Sea Level
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Maximum Speed at 36,000 Ft
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Acceleration Time at Sea Level from 200 Knots to Mach 0.9
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Instantaneous Turn Rate Sea Level, Max Reheat
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Sustained Turn Rate at Mach 0.9 at 5000ft, Max Dry
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (1)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>9 (1)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kpm 07</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>industry Flight Trials to Extend the Aircraft Performance Envelope Have Identified Acoustic Vibration Within the Engine Intake which is Causing the Intake to Resonate at Very High Speeds. This Has Potential Long Term Fatigue Implications. It is Assessed that it Would not be Cost Effective to Conduct Trials to Expand the Existing Clearance.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kpm 02</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>refined Modelling Carried Out to Support the 1994 Reorientation Submission Indicated that in the Most Adverse Conditions the Specified Landing Distance Would not be Achieved - this Was Accepted by the Equipment Approvals Committee.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.3.2 Typhoon Future Capability Programme

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
To Engage a Defined Set of Targets.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
To Complete Air Policing Duties.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
To Maintain Typhoon Rates of Effort.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
To Satisfy Communications and Information Systems Interoperability Requirements.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risk)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
To Complete a Mission in Zero Visibility.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
To Complete the Mission from Zero to Bright Sunlight.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
To Maintain the Typhoon Supportability.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (2)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>7 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
DLOD
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>mpr15</Td>
<td>
KPM 1
</Td>
<td>
Technical and Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Evolving Threat Scenarios, in Concert with on-Going Trials and Evaluation Continue to Highlight the Requirement for a Spiral Development Model.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>mpr15</Td>
<td>
KPM 4
</Td>
<td>
Technical and Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
The Formal Acceptance of FCP 1 (P1E and Additional Capabilities) Had a Small Number of Provisos which are Being Addressed.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KPM
</Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Operational Impact of Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1 and 4</Td>
<td>
MPR15
</Td>
<td>
Annual Updates.
</Td>
<td>nil Variance to Report.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3.3 Meteor Integration

### D.3.3.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The Systems Shall be Able to Change BVRAAM Parameters During Mission Pre-Launch.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The Systems Shall Acquire Adversary Airborne Targets.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The System Shall be Able to Launch BVRAAM Against Designated Airborne Targets.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The System Shall Select a Weapon for Launch.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The System Shall Send Target Data Updates to Air-to-Air Weapons Post Launch.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The Systems MMI Shall Provide the Pilot with Accurate and Timely Information.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The System Shall Interface with BVRAAM Weapon Consistent with Its ICD.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The System Shall Provide Accurate Pilot Training to the Meteor Deltas.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The Platform Shall Support Two Missiles in Flight to the Required Uncertainty Index with Graceful Degradation for Further Missiles
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The Platform Shall Have the Ability to Carry a Mixed Configuration of 4 Meteor UF and 2 AMRAAM UW.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3.4 Storm Shadow Integration

### D.3.4.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Existing Storm Shadow Weapon to be Integrated Onto the Tr2/3 Typhoon.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires Storm Shadow to be Integrated without Increasing the Overall Level of Risk to the Weapon System.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Integration of Storm Shadow to Exploit the Existing Ground Support Equipment (GSE)
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires Storm Shadow Integration to be Compatible with Existing Typhoon Mission Planning, Mission Preparation and Mission Data Loading Systems.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Integration to Support all Existing Storm Shadow Functionality.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires Typhoon to be Capable of Carriage, Release and Jettison of Up to 2 Storm Shadow Weapons Within the Defined Envelope.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Capability to Carry Out Air-to-Air Refuelling Whilst Carrying Storm Shadow
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Capability to Verify and Change Storm Shadow Selected Target Prior to the Point of Release.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Capability to Erase Protectively Marked Information from the Storm Shadow Weapon.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Storm Shadow Training System for Mission Planners, Ground Crew and Pilots.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3.5 Brimstone 2 Integration

### D.3.5.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Brimstone 2 Weapon System (Including Launcher) to be Integrated Onto T2/3 Typhoon.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires that the Integration of Brimstone 2 Shall not Degrade or Have any Adverse Impact on Survivability.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
Integration Shall Enable Full Utility of the Weapon System to Pilot via Human Machine Interface (HMI).
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The System Shall not Degrade or Prevent the Use of any Platform Sensor, Air-to-Air or a-S Effector.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Integration of Brimstone 2 to Exploit the Existing Ground Support Equipment (GSE).
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires Brimstone 2 Integration to be Compatible with Existing Typhoon Mission Planning, Mission Preparation and Mission Data Loading Systems.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Integration to Support all Existing Brimstone 2 Functionality.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires Typhoon to be Capable of Carriage, Release and Jettison of the Brimstone 2 Weapon (Note: 1 x Brimstone 2 Weapon Comprises 1 Launcher Holding 3 Missiles) Within the Defined Envelope.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Ability to Carry Out Air to Air Refuelling Whilst Carrying the Brimstone 2 Weapon.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Brimstone 2 Training System for Mission Planners, Ground Crew and Pilots.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>10 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.4. Support Contract

## D.4.1 Typhoon

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Forward Available Fleet: Measured as a Percentage of the Average Number of Available Forward Available Fleet Aircraft Against the Planned Number of Forward Available Fleet Aircraft for the Accounting Period.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Operational Aircraft: Measured as the Number of Operational Aircraft Within the Appropriate Readiness Timescale.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Pilots: Measured as the Percentage of Productive Pilots Available for Tasking Against the Planned Number of Pilots for the Accounting Period.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>3 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>3 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>forward Available Fleet of T2 Ac Now Expected to be Sufficient and at Correct Capability Standard.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>adequate Synthetic Training Devices will Now be in Place on Time.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>there is a Risk that the Tranche 2 Aircraft will not be Available to Declare as Operational Force Elements as a Result of Technical and Support Issues. Several Avionic Upgrades and a Full Deployable Support Solution Must be in Place for Tranche 2 Aircraft to be Declared as Operational</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>there is a Risk that the Synthetic Training Devices (Simulators) will not be Upgraded Concurrently with the Aircraft. This Would Mean that Pilots Would be Unable to Train Adequately for Employing the New Aircraft Standard.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
