---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Successor
Page_from: 225.0
Page_to: 232.0
Project_label: Successor
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_225_232.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 51%" />
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Successor
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Submarines
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Vice Admiral Andrew Matthews
</Td>
<td>11 May 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Future Submarines Concept Phase Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Concept Nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Common Missile Compartment Non-Recurring Costs Future Submarines Assessment Phase Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Assessment Phase Nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Assessment Phase
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">concept Phase Concept Phase Concept Phase Concept Phase Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>in 2007 Parliament Endorsed the Government's Decision Set Out in their 2006 White Paper, "The Future of the United Kingdom's Nuclear Deterrent" Cm 6994, to Maintain a Continuous at Sea Nuclear Deterrent by Means of a New Class of Submarine. This will Replace the Current Vanguard Class as it Comes Out of Service. the Submarines are Part of the MOD's Committed Core Equipment Programme as Announced by the Secretary of State on 14th May 2012. Any Decision to Build will not be Taken until after the Next General Election Expected in 2015 with any Main Gate Approval Expected in 2016. the Successor Boats are Expected to Have a 25 Year Life with the Option of at Least a Five Year Extension and Suitable Low Detectability. the Current Planned Service Entry Date for the First Boat is 2028. a Common Missile Compartment for the Submarine is Being Developed with the United States. This will House the Trident Strategic Weapon System. Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant: At Initial Gate in April 2011, the Decision Was Taken to Power the Submarine with a Nuclear Propulsion System Known as Pressurised Water Reactor 3 (PWR3) which Incorporates the Latest Safety Technologies and Ensures the Boats Have the Performance to Deliver the United Kingdom's Minimum Credible Nuclear Deterrent Out to the 2060s. the Nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Programme Brings Focused Investment to Regenerate the UK Nuclear Propulsion Design and Support Capability, and Ensures We Have the Design Base Essential to Maintain a Strategic Sovereign UK Nuclear Capability. the Wider Programme: The Strategic Defence and Security Review Concluded that it Would be Possible to Defer Decisions on the Replacement of both the Warhead and Infrastructure Elements of the Programme. Over the Next few Years Concept Studies will Begin to Refine Potential Programmes and Costs. No Decision as to Whether a New Warhead Design is Needed will be Taken until the Next Parliament. Neither the Warhead nor Infrastructure is Covered in this Report. the Rolls-Royce Core Production Capability Facility at Raynesway Has Passed Main Gate and will Provide the Fuel Cores for Successor. This is Covered by a Separate Project Summary Sheet. the Expected Overall Cost of any Replacement of the Nuclear Deterrent Remains as Set Out in Para 5-11 of the 2006 White Paper as Between
£15-20bn for a Four Boat Solution.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the MOD's Future Submarines Project Team Was Established in 2007 from a Small Group Within the then Nuclear Directorate. Three Companies, BAE Submarine Solutions (Platform), Babcock (Support), and Rolls-Royce (Power Plant) Known as the Tier One Industrial Partners Were Awarded Contracts for the Collaborative Concept Phase. This Work Informed the Options Considered at Initial Gate. a Technical Demonstrator Programme Was also Undertaken. an Integrated Project Management Team Has also Been Established. Initial Gate Was Approved on 14th April 2011 and Announced in Parliament on 18 May 2011 when a Report to Parliament, "The United Kingdom's Future Nuclear Deterrent:The Submarine Initial Gate Parliamentary Report" Was Made.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>this Followed a Concept Phase from 2006/07 to April 2011 During which £905m Was Approved. the MOD's Future Submarines Project Team Was Established in 2007 from a Small Group Within the then Nuclear Directorate. Three Companies, BAE Submarine Solutions (Platform), Babcock (Support), and Rolls-Royce (Power Plant) Known as the Tier One Industrial Partners Were Awarded Contracts for the Collaborative Concept Phase. This Work Informed the Options Considered at Initial Gate. a Technical Demonstrator Programme Was also Undertaken. an Integrated Project Management Team Has also Been Established. Initial Gate Was Approved on 14th April 2011 and Announced in Parliament on 18 May 2011 when a Report to Parliament, "The United Kingdom's Future Nuclear Deterrent:The Submarine Initial Gate Parliamentary Report" Was Made. This Followed a Concept Phase from 2006/07 to April 2011 During which
£905m Was Approved. This Period Saw the Preparation and Staffing of the Initial Gate Business Case Through the MOD and Treasury with Treasury Approval Received on 29th March 2011. 2010 also Saw the SDSR Strategic Defence and Security Review,
"Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: Publication of the Strategic Defence and Security Review" Chapter Three, Published on 19th October 2010, and the Trident Value for Money Review ( Fact Sheet Ten). These Made Changes to the White Paper Assumptions. These Included: a Deferral of the Planned Delivery of the First Submarine from 2024 to 2028, and a Deferral of the Main Gate Decision Point from 2014 to 2016. There Was also Agreement with the United States on the Major Parameters of the Jointly-Developed Common Missile Compartment Design that will be Capable of Carrying the Current Trident D5 Missiles and any Replacement Missile Once the D5 Reaches the End of Its Expected Life in the 2040s. Initial Gate Considered the Submarine Design using Pull Through of Astute Technology to Reduce Cost and Design and Delivery Risk, and Provide Commonality in Training and Maintenance. There Were also Opportunities to Take Advantage of Developments Since the Astute Design. One Such Was the Selection of Pressure Water Reactor 3 as the Submarine's Propulsion System. Pressure Water Reactor 3 Provides Superior Performance and Meets the Nuclear Safety Regulator's Requirement to Continually Improve Our Performance and Meet the "As Low as Reasonably Practicable" Requirement. However Pressure Water Reactor 3 is more Expensive to Buy and Operate over a 25 Year Period, but Cheaper if the Boats are Run for Longer. the Coalition's Policy on the Successor Deterrent is Clear, and it is that it is Committed to the United Kingdom's Nuclear Deterrent Based on a Ballistic Missile Submarine. the Trident Alternatives Study will Form Part of the Information Considered to Assist the Decisions Needed at Main Gate. Immediately Following Approval, Design Activities Commenced under an Extension of the Concept Contract While the Full Design Phase and Engineering Services Framework Contracts Were Finalised and Signed with BAE Submarine Solutions and Babcock on 13th December 2011. These Cover the Period Up to Main Gate and Consist of an Overarching Framework Structure with Rolling Waves of Task Packages. a Contract Amendment to Align with These Contracts Was also Placed with Rolls-Royce. a Collaborative Agreement Between all Three Companies and the MOD Was also Signed. This Governs the Relationships Between Industrial Parties’ Performance and Profit Retention. the MOD and Integrated Programme Management Teams Have Been Established and Teams Built Up in Barrow and Derby. an Integrated Master Schedule Has Been Agreed with Industry Across the Programme. a Review Note on Progress in Year Was Submitted to the MOD's Investment Approvals Committee in July 2012.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.3. in-Year Progress

1.  the Ship Specification, which Decomposes the User Requirement into Specific Requirements for Each Submarine System and Attribute, Has Been Fully Developed and Placed under Configuration Control with the Exception of Outfitting Requirements. the First Phase of the Platform Detailed Design Programme, Design Intent Definition which Confirms the System Architectures, Completed to Plan in December 2012 with a Major Design Review (System Definition Review, SDR) Across all of the Major Systems Areas. the Detailed Design of the Pressurised Water Reactor 3 (PWR3) Plant is Now over Half-Way Through the Design Phase. All Significant Design Decisions Have Been Taken, with the Design on Track for Its Critical Design Review in December 2014; the Primary Propulsion System Exceeded the Design Maturity Requirements for SDR.

2.  During December 2012, the Annual Report to Parliament Was Submitted and in March 2013, the MoD Investment Approvals Committee Approved the Build Strategy for the Common Missile Compartment.

3.  the Main Gate Investment Decision Point Has Been Updated to September 2016. This Revised Date Reflect the Point at which the Project will Transition into the Build Phase. the Forecasted Assessment Phase Costs Have also Reduced Compared to the Previous Submission, Based on Updated Forecasts from Industry and Maturity of Estimates for the Assessment Phase.

1.  Capability Risks

Without the Design and Build of a New Class of Ballistic Missile Submarines, the United Kingdom Would be Unable to Maintain Its Independent Nuclear Deterrent Once the Current Vanguard Class Goes Out of Service. This Decision Was Agreed by Parliament in 2007 Following the 2006 White Paper: "The Future of the United Kingdom's Nuclear Deterrent" Cm 6994. the Current Government also Supports the Maintenance of the United Kingdom’s Independent Nuclear Deterrent Capability.

The Nuclear Deterrent is a Current Operation.

1.  Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability August 2021</Td>
<td>post Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project /
Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>future Submarines Concept Phase</Td>
<td>
Ascertained Costs to be Three Tier 1 Contractors
</Td>
<td>
Concept Phase
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Concept</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
<td>
Concept Phase
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - International
</Td>
<td>
Concept Phase
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>common Missile Compartment Non-
Recurring Costs</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - International
</Td>
<td>
Concept Phase
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Submarines Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
Ascertained Costs to be Three Tier 1 Contractors
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - International
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Support Chain Strategy is in Preparation, and Engagement Has Started. the Aim is for Optimised, Affordable Through Life Support with Established Whole Life Costs and Challenging Availability Targets. the Target is to Have a Whole Life Cost that Does not Exceed that of the Current Vanguard Class and Ensure Maintenance of the Continuous at Sea Deterrent. Drivers for Change Include: Long Term Supply Chain Incentivisation and Reductions in Design Complexity and Component Range and Scale. Babcock is the Tier 1 Company for Support, and the Strategy will be Delivered as a Collaborative Activity Within the Submarine Enterprise Performance Programme.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
Babcock
</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Concept Phase (Pre Assessment Phase)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/ Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>future Submarines Concept Phase</Td>
<td>209</Td>
<td>198</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Concept</Td>
<td>305</Td>
<td>305</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology</Td>
<td>108</Td>
<td>80</Td>
<td>-28</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>common Missile Compartment Non-Recurring Costs</Td>
<td>283</Td>
<td>264</Td>
<td>-19</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Concept Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>905</Td>
<td>847</Td>
<td>-58</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/ Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>future Submarines Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1832</Td>
<td>1764</Td>
<td>-68</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1017</Td>
<td>1040</Td>
<td>23</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>nuclear Propulsion Critical Technology Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>166</Td>
<td>132</Td>
<td>-34</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Assessment Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>3015</Td>
<td>2936</Td>
<td>-79</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
3920
</Td>
<td>
3783
</Td>
<td>
-137
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI - Not Applicable

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>concept Phase / Pre Initial Gate</Td>
<td>787</Td>
<td>16</Td>
<td>803</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>315</Td>
<td>415</Td>
<td>730</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>1102</Td>
<td>431</Td>
<td>1533</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

The Assessment Phase Approved Costs Reflect a £47m Approvals Transfer Between Next Generation Nuclear

Propulsion Plant and Future Submarines. Though Forecast as £60m Within the Common Missile

Compartment Review Note (Dated January 2013), Subsequent Review Has Reduced this to £47m. This will be Formalised in the Annual Review Note to the Investment Aapprovals Committee

Concept Phase (Pre Assessment Phase) Costs Have Been Included Due to There Scale. Usually, Concept

Phase Costs are Relatively Small, but Given the Size of this Project They Have Been Included for Full Disclosure.

Assessment Phase Sunk Costs in MPR2012 Incorrectly Included Those of the Common Missile Compartment. the above Table Has Correctly Attributed Those to Concept Phase Costs.

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>successor</Td>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>
September 2016
</Td>
<td>65</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>budgeted for Forecast</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>successor</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - N/a

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
1-10
</Td>
<td>successor Technology Readiness Levels are Classified</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable
