---
Year: 2011.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile
Page_from: 77.0
Page_to: 90.0
Project_label: Beyond Visual Range Air to Air Missile
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2011_77_90.md
---
| Project Title                      |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile |                                             |
|                                        |                                             |
| Team Responsible                   |                                             |
| Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile |                                             |
|                                        |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner           |                                             |
| N/a                                    |                                             |
|                                        |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name             | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile | Post-Main Investment Decision               |
|                                        |                                             |

BEYOND VISUAL RANGE AIR-to-AIR MISSILE

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile System (the Selected Equipment is the Meteor System) will Provide Typhoon with the Capability to Combat Projected Air-to-Air Threats and Sustain Air Superiority Throughout the Life of the Aircraft. the Integration of Meteor Onto Typhoon Forms Part of the Project, with a Current Initial Operating Capability of 2015.

Until Meteor is Integrated, Typhoon will be Armed with the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile, Acquired from Raytheon Missile Systems.

Key Features of the Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile Requirement Include Stealthy Launch, Enhanced Kinematics (Giving Increased Stand-Off and Disengagement Ranges, a Better Ability to Engage and Destroy Highly Agile Manoeuvring Targets), a Large No-Escape Zone and Robust Performance Against Countermeasures.

This is a Collaborative Programme With: Germany, Spain and Italy (for Typhoon), Sweden (for Gripen) and France (for Rafale).

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

On 2 October 1995, Minister (Defence Procurement) Gave Approval for the Issue of an Invitation to Tender for Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile. the Invitation to Tender Was Issued on 5 December 1995. Two Bids Were Received; One from a Consortium Led by Matra BAe Dynamics UK Ltd (Now MBDA UK Ltd), and One from Raytheon Systems Ltd. After Extensive Analysis, it Was Decided that both Bids Contained Areas of Risk that Needed to be Addressed Before a Development and Production Contract Could be Placed. in May 1997, a Project Definition
& Risk Reduction Phase Was Approved and Contracts Were Placed on both Bidders for a Period of One Year, with Results to be Technically and Operationally Assessed Before a Final Decision Was Made. Both Project Definition & Risk Reduction Contracts Were Let in August 1997 and Revised Bids Were Received in May 1998. Due to the Complexity of the Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile Assessment, the Need to Accommodate the Requirements of the Prospective Partner Nations and the Need to Go for ‘best and Final’ Offers (Primarily as a Result of a French Request to Join the Programme), Main Gate Approval Was not Achieved until May 2000. in His Statement to the House of Commons on 16 May 2000, the Secretary of State Announced that the Matra BAe Dynamics Meteor Missile Had Been Selected.

## A.3. Progress

The Contract for the Demonstration, Manufacture and Support of Meteor Was Placed with MBDA UK Ltd on 23 December 2002. to Date, the UK, Spain, France, Sweden and Italy Have Committed to Production.

The Meteor Programme Continues to Move Ahead, with Increasing Confidence Gained Through the Ongoing Programme of Guided Firings and Other Activities Towards the Validation of the Performance Outturn of the Missile.

There Has Been a Three-Month in-Year Slippage in Development Outturn Date Owing to Technical Issues Identified During Pre-Qualification Activities, Including the Impact of a Unilateral Decision by One Sub-Contractor to Change a Component Design for Ease of Production. This Has Delayed the Start of the Full Qualification Programme.

The Programme of Early Integration Work on Typhoon (CP270), which Began in July 2009, is Proceeding on Schedule, and Has Been Expanded to Mitigate Delays in Getting the Main Integration Activity on Contract. These Latter Delays Represent a Threat to the Achievement of in-Service Date 2. Further Mitigation Actions are under Review.

The Industrial Proposal for Full Integration (SRP14) First Submitted by EF GmbH in 2009 Was Revised by Industry in December 2010.

Project Summary Sheet

BEYOND VISUAL RANGE AIR-to-AIR MISSILE

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Meteor Capability is Required to Replace the Current AIM-120 Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Whose Capability Falls Significantly Below that of Meteor. the Procurement of the Advanced Medium Range Airto-Air Missile Was a Temporary Solution to Provide Typhoon’s Anti-Air Capability for the Period Between Typhoon Operational Employment Date (June 2007) and Meteor in-Service Date. Whilst the Continued Use of the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile is not Expected to Affect Peacetime Air Policing, the Survivability and Capability of Typhoon in Almost all Operational Roles will be Compromised by Non-Delivery of Meteor. It will also Necessitate an Extension to the Life of Existing Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Missiles Beyond the Currently Supported Date, and will Introduce a Risk that Stock Levels will be Insufficient to Meet the Operational Needs. Should Meteor Integration Slip, There will be a Need to Address any Gap in the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Capability.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme 2</Td>
<td>
June 2015
</Td>
<td>
Concept Phase
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK (Meteor)
</Td>
<td>demonstration (all Six Nations) and Manufacture

(United Kingdom, France, Spain and Sweden at Present)
</Td>
<td>firm Price Up to June 2007 (Demonstration), Firm Price Up to June 2006 (Manufacture),

Fixed Price Thereafter Subject to Variation of Price.
</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>
Raytheon Missile

Systems ((Advanced Medium Range Airto-Air Missile)</Td>
<td>manufacture to in Service</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>non-Competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
It is Currently Envisaged that Meteor will be Supported Through Contractor Logistic Support Arrangements, Covering Post Design Services, Repairs and Surveillance and Life Extension. the Final Agreed Strategy is Dependent Upon the Outcome of the Reliability Trials Within the Development Programme and Information and Decisions from the Meteor Partner Nations. the Current Forecast is that These Inputs will be Available in Time to Inform a Support Strategy Submission to the Approval Authorities in During 2011.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Project Summary Sheet

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Approved Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>20</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>2%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>20</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>1%</Td>
<td>2%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>lowest</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>forecast /
Approved (£m)</Td>
<td>budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only) (£m)</Td>
<td>highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>1098</Td>
<td>1136</Td>
<td>1249</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>1136</Td>
<td>1115</Td>
<td>-21</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>1136</Td>
<td>1115</Td>
<td>-21</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2011</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>change in Euro and Krona Exchange Rate on Meteor Prime Contract (+£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2011</Td>
<td>
+14
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>uk Share to Support Extended Development Guided Firing Programme (+£8m), UK Specific Requirements (+£4m), Additional Common Memorandum of Understanding Requirement to Support the Development Programme (+£2m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
February 2011
</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes - International Collaboration</Td>
<td>benefit of Meteor Partner Nation Committing to a Production Order and Related Production Pre Investment (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
January 2011
</Th>
<th>+1</Th>
<th>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Th>
<th>effect of VAT Increase from 17.5% to 20% on Meteor Prime Contract (+£1m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
December 2010
</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>procurement Processes - International Collaboration</Td>
<td>benefit of Meteor Partner Nation Committing to a Production Order and Related Production Pre Investment (-£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
September 2010
</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>procurement Processes - International Collaboration</Td>
<td>benefit of Meteor Partner Nation Committing to a Production Order and Related Production Pre Investment (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2010</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>procurement Processes - International Collaboration</Td>
<td>benefit of Meteor Partner Nation Committing to a Production Order and Related Production Pre Investment (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>adjustment to Meteor Production Requirements (-£6m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-40</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury (£40m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-13</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>re-Assessment of Meteor Integration (-£4m). Reassessment in UK Technical Support / GFE (-£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>benefit of Achieving Prime Contract Milestones at Reduced VAT Rate (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>change in Euro and Krona Exchange Rate on Meteor Prime Contract (+22m). Revaluation of Foreign Currency Assumptions on Provision of Target Service in Support of Meteor Firing Trials (+1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>change in Euro Exchange Rate on Meteor Prime Contract (+3m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>change in Assumption in Regard to Recovery of VAT (+£9m), Derivation of Approved Cost on Resource Basis (-£4m), Correction of Treatment in Contracted Out Services VAT from Previous Years to Align with Main Gate Approval (+£3m)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+59</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>container Development (+£1m). Container Production (+£1m). Support to Typhoon Integration (+£2m). Revised Deliveries of Meteor Missiles (+£12m). Container Logistics Support for Meteor (+£7m). Production Investment (+£1m). Trial Ranger (+£11m). Increase in Unit Production Cost for Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Missiles (MPR03 +£25m; MPR04 +£15m). Surveillance Spares for Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile (+£1m). UK Share of Government Furnished Equipment (+£6m). Decrease for Service Evaluation Trials for Meteor (-£7m). Integration of Meteor Onto Typhoon (-£9m), Production of Meteor Telemetred Operational Missiles (-£1m), in Service Reliability Demonstration Support (£-3m). Meteor Technical Support (-£2m). Miscellaneous Meteor Items (-£1m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-131</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>in Consultation with the Customer the Decision Has Been Taken to Examine Capability Trade-Offs While Realignment and Integration Proposals are Being Matured and Assessed Against the Requirement (-£36m). Effect of Equipment Planning 05 Options: Reduce Meteor Numbers (-£55m), Decision Taken not to Upgrade AIM-120b Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missiles to C-Standard (-£65m). Re-Costing of UK Technical Support Requirements in Addition to Memorandum of Understanding Commitments (+£3m). Re-Costing of Meteor Integration (-£1m). Increases for Insensitive Munitions (+£9m). Missiles &amp; Ancillary Equipment in Support of Typhoon Integration (+£6m). Surveillance &amp; Life Extension (+£5m). Initial Spares (+£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-120</Th>
<th>changed Capability Requirements</Th>
<th>uk Share of Additional Common Requirement (+£2m), Additional Requirement for Dual Date Link (+£6m), Additional Containers Required for Meteor (+£2m), Refurbishment of Existing Advanced Medium Range Air-toAir Missiles (-£16m). Re-Costing of Meteor Missile Additional Acquisition (-£2m). Reduction in Missile Numbers to Minimum Contractual Commitments (£53m). Reassessment of in Service Evaluation Trials for Meteor (-£19m). Re-Assessment of Meteor Integration (-£40m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+55</Td>
<td>
Change in Associated Project
</Td>
<td>uk Support to Development Guided Firing Campaign on Gripen (+£6m). UK Support to Tornado F3 Alternative Trials Platform (+£3m). UK Share of “realignment” Programme Due to the Non-Availability of Typhoon Aircraft for Meteor Development Trials Programme (+£46m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-8</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>uk’s Share of MBDA Revalidation of Prices Caused by Delay in Contract Placement (+£6m). Revalidation to Reflect Prices Within Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Contract (-
£14m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+30</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>change in Euro Exchange Rate on Meteor Prime (+£29m). Change in Dollar Exchange Rate on Advanced Medium Range Airto-Air Missile (-£11m). Revaluation of Foreign Currency Assumptions on Current and Future Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Contracts (+£9m). Revaluation of Foreign Currency Assumptions on Meteor Prime Contract (+£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-31</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>revaluation of UK’s Share of Government Furnished Equipment/ Government Furnished Facilities Requirements (-£20m). Additional Funding Required for Integration of AIM120C Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missiles Onto Typhoon (+£82m). Gripen Trial (+£2m). Realism Measure on Funding for Integration of AIM-120c Advanced Medium Range Air-to-
Air Missiles Onto Typhoon (£65m). Decrease in UK’s Share of Development (-£30m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+145</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>increase of UK’s Share of Development Through Transfer of Work Share from Germany (+£31m) and UK Share of Government Furnished Equipment (+£1m). UK Share of Memorandum of Understanding Technical Support Requirements (+£2m). UK Share of Memorandum of Understanding Government Furnished Equipment Requirements (+£7m). Revised Variation of Price Associated with Deliveries of Meteor Missiles (+£27m). Reduction in Technical Support to Advanced Medium Range Air-to-
Air Missile (-£5m). Prime Contractor Supporting Typhoon Integration Programme (+£20m). UK Contractual Commitment to Pre-Production Activities (+£5m). Cost Associated with UK’s Contractual Commitment to Minimum Production Quantities (+£57m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-21</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
TRUE
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

## B.4. Unit Production Cost/Quantities Required

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>20</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>20</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>613</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>695</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>633</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>715</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>october 1995</Td>
<td>may 2000</Td>
<td>55</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (Original in-Service Date)</Td>
<td>june 2010</Td>
<td>
September 2011
</Td>
<td>august 2012</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (in-Service Date 1)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>august 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (in-Service Date 2)</Td>
<td>february 2015</Td>
<td>july 2015</Td>
<td>july 2015</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>original in-Service Date Definition: Achievement of an Operational Capability with (CONF) Missiles and Supporting Infrastructure. at MPR 2007 Forecast in-Service Date Was August 2013, Against the Approved in-Service Date at Main Gate of August 2012. the in-Service Date Definition Was Redefined in 2008, Following a Review of the Programme to Reflect a Two-Stage Approach to Delivering the Capability, as Follows:</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>in-Service Date 1: (Platform Ready): A Fully Developed Missile Standard Ready for Delivery and Platform Integration, Having Demonstrated Achievement of in-Service Date 1 Key Performance Measures</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>in-Service Date 2: Initial Operating Capability (Typhoon Meteor Capability): The First Front Line Unit is Declared Operational with at Least  Missiles and Having Demonstrated Achievement of in-Service Date 2 Key Performance Measures.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Date</Th>
<th>
Actual / Forecast

Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (Original InService Date)</Td>
<td>
September 2011
</Td>
<td>august 2013</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (in-Service Date 1)</Td>
<td>august 2012</Td>
<td>
November 2012
</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (in-Service Date 2)</Td>
<td>july 2015</Td>
<td>july 2015</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile - Original in Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (+/- Months)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+15</Td>
<td>change in Associated Project</Td>
<td>typhoon Integration Delays Cannot be Absorbed and Uncertainty over Typhoon Future Capability Programme (+15 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>slippage Caused by Delays in Placing Contract (+11 Months). Reassessment of Opportunities Arising from Meteor Realignment Activities, to Reduce the Duration of Firing Trial Campaigns and to De-Risk Transition from Demonstration to Production Phases (-3 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.2 Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile - In Service Date 1

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (+/- Months)</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
February 2011
</Td>
<td>
+3
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>a Supplier Design Change Delayed the Start of Qualification (+3 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+3
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.3 Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile - In Service Date 2

## C.3.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>change in Associated Project</Td>
<td>extension to the Life of the Current Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Variant until Integration of Meteor Onto Typhoon is Achieved (+£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">total</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>extended Reliance on the Current AIM-120 Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile. the Capability of the Latter Falls Significantly Below that of Meteor: Its Procurement Was a Temporary Solution to Provide Typhoon with an Anti-Air Capability for the Period Between Typhoon Operational Employment Date and Meteor in-Service Date. Whilst the in-Service Date Delay is not Expected to Affect Peacetime Air Policing, the Survivability and Capability of Typhoon in Almost all Operational Roles Would be Compromised by an Extended Delay. a Staged Transfer from Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile to Meteor is Necessary Owing to the Latter's Delivery Profile, and Hence Use of Advanced Medium Air-to-Air Missile by Typhoon Extends Beyond Meteor in-Service Date. There is some Risk that Part of the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile Stocks will not Endure until the Revised in-Service Date and Hence We may Fall Below the Minimum Required Stockpile Liability, Although this Cannot be Confirmed at Present.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile</Td>
<td>the Full Exploitation of the Meteor Capabilities by the Typhoon Platform. This Includes a Two Way Datalink, a Full Six-Missile Fit and the Full Use of Meteor Symbology and Cockpit Functionality</Td>
<td>the Option of Proceeding to Full Operating Capability will be Considered in Due Course in the Light of Further Threat Analysis.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 60%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>sentinel Score</Th>
<th>
69 AMBER
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>
Not Met /

Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>integrated Meteor Missile, Support Equipment</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>industry Led Training for in-Service Users</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>industrial Support for in-Service Use</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>defence Estate Prepared to Support</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>principles for Capability Employment</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>establishing Organisational Relationship</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>identifying Data, Information, Knowledge</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (1)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2. Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
November 2010
</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>combination of the Declared in-Year Slip (See Section C.3.3.2.) and the Risk of Further Delays in the Final Stages of the Development Programme which will Prevent Timely Signature of the Certificate of Design and Thus Ability to Accept Deliveries.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1. Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>multiple Target Capability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>kill Probability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>enhanced Typhoon Survivability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>typhoon Compatibility</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>minimum Air Carriage Life</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td>
Logistics
</Td>
<td>reliability</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>
Logistics
</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
7 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
7 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.4. Support Contract
