---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Indirect Fire Precision Attack
Page_from: 32.0
Page_to: 39.0
Project_label: Indirect Fire Precision Attack
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_32_39.md
---
Team Responsible

Indirect Fire Precision Attack Project Team

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Capability (Deep Target Attack)

Senior Responsible Officer

\-

Number of Projects / Increments 5

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision – Loitering Munitions, Guided Shell, Guided Multiple Launcher Rocket System, Large Long Range Rocket •
Post Main Investment Decision – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition –
Cancellation Approved by Investment Approvals Board 21 December 2009

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Indirect Fire Precision Attack will Provide, by Incremental Acquisition, a Suite of Munitions for Indirect Precision Attack of Static, Mobile, and Manoeuvring Targets, Extending to Ranges in Excess of 150 Kilometres.

The Capability Required under Indirect Fire Precision Attack will be Delivered Through a Structured Programme of Assessment, Demonstration and Manufacturing Phases. to Support the Incremental Nature of the Programme an Overarching Assessment Phase is Providing the Evidence to Support Decisions on Individual Components via a Series of Main Gate Business Cases.

The Assessment Phase is Indicating that the Indirect Fire Precision Attack Capability is Likely to be Achieved by a Mixture of Guided Rockets, Enhanced Artillery Shells and Loitering Munitions. They will Carry a Variety of Payloads. Indirect Fire Precision Attack Munitions will Make Use of a Number of Inservice Platforms Such as the Multiple Launch Rocket System and the AS90 Self-Propelled Howitzer. the Loitering Munition Early Capability Does not Include a Platform Although the Munitions are Trailer Mounted. Integration into a Platform Could be Part of Later Blocks (Variants). the Mix of Munitions Procured under the Programme will Have a Range of in-Service Dates: this Multi-Solution Approach is Being Managed Through an Incremental Procurement Strategy.

The Main Gate Business Case for the First Component, a 155mm Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition, Was Approved in July 2007 with a Target in Service Date of September 2011. Cancellation of this Project Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board on 21 December 2009. This Was as a Result of Technical Difficulties Resulting in the Contractor Being Unable to Achieve an Acceptable Level of Technology Maturity Within the Approved Time and Cost Boundaries. Further Information on the Cancellation is Given in Section E.

The Second Component is the Loitering Munition. Loitering Munitions can be Launched in Response to an Identified Target but can also be Flown to Re-Programmable Locations and Maintained in a Holding Pattern until Given a Target. They are Controlled by an Operator Who will Have a Real-Time Image of the Intended Target and Surrounding Area Providing the Ability to Control the Exact Time, Attitude and Direction of the Attack of a Static, Re-Locatable or Moving Target, Including Providing a Contribution to the Formal Target Identification and Confirmation Process.

The Remaining Components are Guided Multiple Launch Rockets, Guided Shell and Large Long Range Rocket.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Initial Gate Business Case for Indirect Fire Precision Attack Was Approved in May 2001. Following Competition using a Capability Based Questionnaire, an Assessment Phase Contract Was Awarded in May 2002 to a Consortium of Companies Led by BAE Systems Strategic Capability Solutions (Formerly Known as BAE Systems Future Systems). This First Indirect Fire Precision Attack Assessment Phase Was Designed to Provide, and Iteratively Update, a ‘route Map’ to Achieving the Full Indirect Fire Precision Attack Capability with Recommendations About the Type, Quantities and Mix of Munitions. in Line with the Approved Strategy for an Incremental Programme, a Series of Assessment Phases are Planned, Each Being Approved by a Separate Review Note. a Contract for the Second Indirect Fire Precision Attack Assessment Phase Was Placed with the BAE Systems Led Consortium in January 2007. This Included the Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration Programme, which Completed in December 2008.

In Light of the Incremental Procurement Strategy, Procurement of Components will be Approved via a Series of Main Gate Business Cases. After Each Component Receives a Main Gate Approval, it will be Managed as a Separate Project in Its Own Right. However, Each Component will Continue to be Included in the Ongoing Operational Analysis Work, so that the Overall Mix and Quantity of Munitions to be Procured can be Refined as the Programme Progresses.

A Contract for the Demonstration and Manufacture of the First Component, Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition, Was Placed with Gesellschaft Für Intelligente Wirksysteme GmbH in September 2007 and Terminated in February 2010.

The Loitering Munition Procurement Strategy Deviates from the above Process in that Approval is Being Sought as Part of the Complex Weapons Programme. the Capabilities/Quantities of this Munition are Therefore Additionally Assessed in their Contribution to the Complex Weapons Portfolio.

## A.3. Progress

Approval for the Cancellation of Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition Was Granted by the Investment Approvals Board on 21 December 2009 and the Contract Was Terminated in February 2010

The Demonstration & Manufacture Phase for the Loitering Munition Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in March 2010 as Part of the Complex Weapons Interim Main Gate 1 Submission.

Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System Has a Proposed First Delivery Date of June 2018. Guided Shell Has an Anticipated in Service Date of 2018 and the Large Long Range Rocket Has an Assumed in Service Date of 2020. These Dates Have Changed Since Major Project Report 09 Due to Budgetary Factors Arising in the 2009/10 Planning Round.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Impact of not Having Indirect Fire Precision Attack is that the Land Component Would not Have Independent Capability to Attack with Precision, Targets Beyond the Range of Direct Fire Weapons Such as Tanks and Anti-Tank Guided Weapons. in this Respect Attack Helicopters are Considered as Direct Fire Weapons as the Helicopter Crew Have to be Able to See the Target. This Means that the Indirect Fire Systems Would Only Suppress or Neutralise Enemy Forces Beyond the Range of Direct Fire Weapons by using Un-Guided Munitions. This Results in Large Wastage and a Collateral Damage Risk which Must be Reduced.

Two Key Benefits of Indirect Fire Precision Attack are the Ability to Destroy Targets that UK Forces Could Previously Only Suppress and that UK Forces can Do so without Causing Significant Collateral Damage. that Indirect Fire Precision Attack is Fully Controlled by the Land Component is Important Because of the Persistence and Responsiveness of Its’ Own Capabilities. Whilst Aircraft can Deliver Precision Weapons Against Targets Beyond the Range of Direct Fire Weapons They Lack Persistence and are Generally not Responsive; They Have to be Pre-Planned or Booked and can Only Stay on Station for a Short Period.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Critical to Achievement of IOC
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>project Title</Th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td Colspan="4">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2 – Loitering Munitions</Td>
<td Colspan="4">non-Competitive Contract – Team Complex Weapons</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 3 – Guided Shell</Td>
<td Colspan="4">not yet Known</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 4 – Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System</Td>
<td Colspan="4">non-Competitive as Already in-Service Therefore Off the Shelf Buy</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 5 – Large Long Range Rocket</Td>
<td Colspan="4">not yet Known</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>contract Scope</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>
Gesellschaft Für Intelligente

Wirksysteme GmbH</Td>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>international Competition</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

### A.7.1. Support / Service / PFI Contract Strategy

| Description                               |                                                                                                                               |
|---------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition | Support Funding is in Place but Cancellation of this Project Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board in December 2009. |

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project – Indirect Fire Precision Attack (Assessment Phase 1)</Td>
<td>24</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">47</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">-3</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project – Indirect Fire Precision Attack (Assessment Phase 2)</Td>
<td>26</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2 – Loitering Munitions (Approval 1)</Td>
<td>39<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A></Td>
<td>92</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2 – Loitering Munitions (Approval 2)</Td>
<td>
58<a Href="Fn2" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref2"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>2</Sup></A>
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2a – Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration</Td>
<td>
23
</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td>
-4
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>
170
</Td>
<td>
158
</Td>
<td>
-12
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">the Approved Cost Figure is Allocated from the Initial Gate Approval Dated 3 June 2008 for the Complex Weapons Programme.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
<li Id="Fn2">the Approved Cost Figure is Allocated from the Review Note Approval Dated 23 December 2009 for the Complex Weapons Programme.<a Href="Fnref2" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>
117
</Td>
<td>
119
</Td>
<td>
122
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2 – Loitering Munitions</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year

Variation

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>122</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>-112</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>122</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>-112</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition Date Variation (£m) Factor Reason for Variation

The Investment Approvals Board

December 2009 -96 Technical Factors Approved Cancellation of the Project

Due to Technical Difficulties. Risk Reduction Work Resulted in a

Historic -13 Technical Factors Reduction in the Amount of Funding

Required Outside the Main Contract Difference Between Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and Highest

Historic -3 Risk Differential

Acceptable (80%) Estimate at Main Gate.

Net Variation -112

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 67%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>
Without BSFM, the Land Environment Lacks an Indirect Fire Antiarmour Capability in some of the Most Demanding Scenarios.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Unit Production Cost – not Applicable

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost</Th>
<th>forecast Cost</Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

### B.5.1.1. Increment 1 - Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
December 2009
</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td>
Technical
</Td>
<td>cancellation of Project Approved</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Total
</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.2. Operational Impact of Support / Service / PFI Cost Variations
– not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 48%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2009</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2010</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>94</Td>
<td>61</Td>
<td>155</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)<sup>6</Sup></Td>
<td>15</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>10</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure (£m)</Td>
<td>109</Td>
<td>56</Td>
<td>165</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project – Indirect Fire Precision Attack (Assessment Phase 1)</Td>
<td>july 2006<sup>7</Sup></Td>
<td>may 2001</Td>
<td>62</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project – Indirect Fire Precision Attack (Assessment Phase 2)</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>july 2006</Td>
<td>ongoing</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>july 2007</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2 – Loitering Munition</Td>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>22</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2a – Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>july 2006</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>
Cancelled
</Td>
<td>
Cancelled
</Td>
<td>
Cancelled
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment 2 – Loitering Munition</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 57%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition
</Td>
<td>
Cancelled.
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  the Demonstration and Manufacture Expenditure Relates to the Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition. This Expenditure Was Classed as Spend on Stock Purchases which Does not Count Against the Department's Capital or Resource Expenditure Totals at the Point when it Occurs but Instead, the Department is Charged for the Cost of the Items in the Future, when They are Used.

2.  Date is Assessment Phase 2 Approval, not Main Gate

### C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

| Description                               | Approved Date | Actual / Forecast Date | Variation | in-Year Variation |
|--------------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|-------------|
| Increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition | July 2007         | Cancelled                  | \-            | \-                    |
| Total                                     |                   |                            | \-            | \-                    |

### C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1. Project

Date Variation Factor Reason for Variation

Uncertainty over Review Note Procurement Approval Outlining the Way Forward

Historic +3 Strategy for this Increment.

Contracting

Historic +3 Delay in Contract Placement

Process

Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and

Historic -6 Risk Differential

Highest Acceptable (85%) Estimate at Main Gate

Net Variation 0

### C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – not Applicable

| Description                               |                                                                                                                           |
|---------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Increment 1 - Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition | Without BSFM, the Land Environment Lacks an Indirect Fire Anti-Armour Capability in some of the Most Demanding Scenarios. |

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>
Cancelled
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.4.1. Definition

### C.4.2. Progress Report – not Applicable

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition</Td>
<td>
Cancelled
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.1. Scope of Support / Service / PFI Contract

### C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Contract Go-Live Date – not Applicable

### C.5.3. Progress Against Approved End of Support / Service / PFI Contract Date – not Applicable

### C.5.4. Operational Impact of Support / Service / PFI Support Contract Variation – not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures – not Applicable

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development – not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Increment 1 - Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition

### D.3.1.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Fuze Shall be Induction Settable in Accordance with NATO Standards
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Maximum Range of the Munition Fired from AS90 39 Calibre Shall be No less than
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Munition’s Sub-Munitions Shall Individually Achieve a Kill Probability at Least  Against Main Battle Tanks under Normal Conditions
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Munition Shall be Compatible with the UK Iseries Charge System
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Munition Shall be Capable of Being Fired from the UK in-Service AS90 39 Calibre Platform
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Munition’s Calibrated Fire Control Model (Data), Suitably Formatted for Integration into the NATO Standard Format, Shall be Supplied
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Munition’s Data Shall be Integrated into Fire Control Application
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Munition on Delivery to Service Shall, when Fired, Have a Probability of Correct Dispensing and Functioning of all Sub Munitions of No less than 90%
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The Munition Shall be Supplied in Packaging Conforming to the Packaging of Ammunition and Explosives Standard.
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The Munition Shall be Capable of Use in the Following Climatic Categories : A2, A3, B1, B2, C0
&amp; C1
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>11</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Having Failed to Find a Valid Target, the Sub Munitions Shall Each Have a Self Destruct Function
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>12</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The Munition Shall be Capable of Being Rendered Safe in Accordance with UK Render Safe Procedures
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>13</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
The Munition Shall be Insensitive Munition Compliant.
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
92%
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

| Date      | Key Measure) | Factor           | Reason for Variation            |
|-------------------------|--------------|--------------|-------------------|
| December 2009 | 13               | Technical Factors^8^ | Cancellation Approved December 2009 |

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KPM
</Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Status
</Th>
<th>
Operational Impact of Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
13
</Td>
<td>
December 2009
</Td>
<td>
Not to be Met
</Td>
<td>
Without BSFM, the Land Environment Lacks an Indirect Fire Anti-Armour Capability in some of the Most Demanding Scenarios.<sup>9</Sup>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2. Support Contract – not Applicable

# E. Section E: Cancellation

1.  See A.5 & A.7

2.  See D3.1

| Increment 1 – Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition | a Review Note Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in September 2009 Recommending Cancellation of this Project Due to Technical Difficulties. Approval Was Given in December 2009. |
|---------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
