---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Assessment phase projects
project: Operational Utility Vehicle System
page_from: 300.0
page_to: 304.0
project_label: Utility Vehicles
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2011_300_304.md
---
| Project Title                              |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Operational Utility Vehicle System             |                                             |
|                                                |                                             |
| Team Responsible                           |                                             |
| Specialist and Logistics Vehicles Project Team |                                             |
|                                                |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner                   |                                             |
| Jon Cook                                       |                                             |
|                                                |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name                     | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| Operational Utility Vehicle System             | Assessment phase                            |
|                                                |                                             |

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

1.  The Requirement

The requirement for Operational Utility Vehicle System was reviewed in 2007 by the Army, as lead user, when the need for vehicles with enhanced protection, capacity and mobility was identified. The Single Statement of User Need stated that ‘Operational Utility Vehicle System would provide a robust, easily supported system, comprising operational utility vehicles that are able to carry light cargo (up to six tonnes) or small groups of personnel, integrate as many special-to-role systems as possible and which can operate in diverse climatic and topographical conditions worldwide, in order to support and contribute to land (including land air) and littoral manoeuvre operations’. This capability would be a key supporting enabler for offensive combat operations providing the following roles; unit level logistic cargo vehicle, systems carrier, mobile command, liaison and personnel transport.

1.  The Assessment Phase

Initial Gate was approved 1 July 2008. The Assessment Phase was split into three stages and considered the benefits of mixed fleets and procuring Fitted For But Not With capabilities against the full requirement. Value for Money was demonstrated in the Combined Operational Effectiveness Investment Appraisal.

Assessment Phase 1- Stage one concentrated on fully understanding the User’s requirement and developing and demonstrating technologies, systems and system interactions, to mitigate identified risks. The focus of this work was capacity and protection to assist in identifying performance boundaries used to inform the scaling (roles and variants) of the fleet size. In tandem, further analysis was conducted to identify the optimum support solution, whilst cross programme coherence was monitored and maintained. The output from Assessment Phase 1 was to inform the decision as to the scaling of the new Operational Utility Vehicle fleet, and whether any in-service vehicles were needed beyond their current Out of Service Date.

As the Operational Utility Vehicle System project is no longer being taken forward there will not be any further Assessment Phases, however had it continued all vehicles would have built on the Research and Development in Assessment Phase 1 by using Technology Demonstrators to develop the overall capability, in order to mature the System Requirement Document.

(New vehicles) Invitation(s) to Tender would have been run for the
‘new’ Operational Utility Vehicles System capability (vehicle acquisition and support solution) in mid Assessment Phase 2 to enable initial capability demonstration and assurance testing of reliability and durability, to have been conducted in the remainder of Assessment Phase 2 and Assessment Phase 3.

(Update in-service vehicles). If required, the Design Authorities (DAs) would have been tasked to develop an upgraded design solution for aspects of the in-service fleet in consultation with subject matter experts. The work to upgrade the fleet would have been completed towards the end of Assessment Phase 2 to identify a preferred bidder so that Main Gate (A) approval could have been sought to commence manufacture in parallel with Assessment Phase 3.

Assessment Phase 3- Stage 3 would have concentrated on demonstration capability and assurance testing to identify a preferred bidder for Main Gate (B).

# A.3 Progress

The Operational Utility Vehicle System programme was deferred for two years as part of the Department's 2010 financial planning round with the previous assumption to restart the project during Financial Year 2011/2012.

The Operational Utility Vehicle System project has been removed from the programme during 2011. A Review Note has been prepared to reflect this, which states that the requirement will be re-scoped, and the outcome of this work will form the basis for the Multi Role Vehicle-
Protected Programme. It is currently planned for Multi Role Vehicle-
Protected to commence Concept stage during Financial Year 2015/2016. Multi Role Vehicle-Protected will have its own Initial Gate and Main Gate approvals.

# A.4 Capability Risks

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Any deployed force operating in the land environment now requires a range of characteristics to operate successfully. Analysis concluded that the current in-service utility vehicle fleet cannot provide the required level of capability in terms of quantity or effectiveness in terms of protection, power and capacity. Changes in legislation regarding emissions and vibration have also led to elements of the utility fleet (Reynolds Boughton 44 and Land Rover Defender vehicles) becoming non-compliant, necessitating modernisation or replacement. The risk of not procuring the Operational Utility Vehicle System capability is:
Insufficient capacity (overloaded vehicles) Inadequate protection Not all the current vehicle fleet can be fitted with communications systems Mobility limitations Obsolescence and alignment with other vehicle platforms Capability Risk mitigation:
The Operational Utility Vehicle System project has now been cancelled. The risk remains extant and will be considered further under the requirement for Multi Role Vehicle-Protected. Our Armed Forces on operations will use the protected Tactical Support Vehicles ordered under the Urgent Operational Requirement process in the interim.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

# A.5 Associated Projects

# A.6 Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 58%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th colspan="2">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
<td>Approval Status</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Operational Utility Vehicle System</td>
<td>Competitive Tender</td>
<td>Pre-Main Gate</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# A.7 Support Strategy

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Project/
Increment Title</th>
<th rowspan="2">
Approved Cost

(£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a

proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</th>
<th>Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Operational Utility Vehicle System</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>-8</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>13</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>-8</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Operational Utility Vehicle</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B.6 Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</th>
<th>In-year expenditure (£m)</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Operational Utility Vehicle System</td>
<td>July 2008</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Operational Utility Vehicle System</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
