---
Year: 2007.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Gate
Project: UKCEC FRIGATE and DESTROYER PROGRAMME
Page_from: 179.0
Page_to: 180.0
Project_label: United Kingdom Co-Operative Engagement Capability Frigate  and Destroyers
  Programme
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2007_179_180.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

UKCEC FRIGATE and DESTROYER PROGRAMME

Picture not Available

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

JOINT SENSOR and ENGAGEMENT NETWORKS (JSENS)

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Information Systems)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the REQUIREMENT

The Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) is a US Naval System that is Fitted to an Increasing Number of US Naval Assets. CEC Does not Replace any Single System; Rather it Optimises War-Fighting Capabilities Inherent in Existing and Future Combat Systems.

UKCEC is a Network Enabled Capability (NEC) Project which will Deliver Improved Situational Awareness, Interoperability and Integration. It will Fill the Capability Gap Identified in the Commander in Chief Fleet’s (CINCFLEET)’s Military Capability (MILCAP) Reports Regarding the Ability to Detect, Monitor, and Counter Air Warfare Threats. It will also Reduce a Gap in Interoperability with the United States.

UKCEC Enhances the Ability of Fitted Platforms to Work Together in Detection, Tracking and Engagement of Air Targets. This Capability Represents a Major Advance in both Air and Missile Defence.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-Service Dates and Costs are not Set until Projects Reach the Point in Time when the Main Investment Decision is Made i.e. Main Gate Approval. Until this Point all Costs and Dates are Outline Assumptions Solely for Internal Planning Purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Operational Analysis Conducted During the Concept Phase Assessed Seven Options; CEC Was Identified as the Only Solution Capable of Meeting Key User Requirements.

The Objective of the Assessment Phase is to Establish the Most Cost Effective Solution to the Requirement for a CEC Capability for Type 23 Frigates (T23) and Type 45 Destroyers (T45). CEC is a Proven US Developed Programme which the UK is Considering Purchasing via the Foreign Military

173

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="4">sales (FMS) Process. the UK, with US Assistance, is Developing and Testing the Platform Architecture and Support and Integration Aspects, to Reduce Risk Prior to Main Gate. Assessment Phase 1 (AP1). Approval for UKCEC AP1 Was Received in May 2000 And, Following a Competition, Contracts Were Placed with Lockheed Martin UK Integrated Systems (LM) and Raytheon UK, with Down-Selection to LM for Assessment Phase 2. This Was for the T23 Only. Also During this Phase a Study Contract Was Undertaken by BAE Systems (BAES) to Investigate CEC Fit on the T45. Assessment Phase 2 (AP2). in May 2003 Approval Was Received to Accelerate the Risk Reduction Work on T45 by Two Years, at No Additional Procurement Cost. in July 2003, this Work Was Placed on Contract by Means of an Amendment to the T45 Prime Contract with BAES, the Prime Contracting Office for the T45. Costed Proposals for the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase for both T23 and T45 Were Delivered by LM and BAES Respectively in 2005. However, an Option Was Taken as Part of the Equipment Plan (EP) 2005 Planning Round Extending the Assessment Phase by 5 Years, Enabling Further De-Risking of the Project. Assessment Phase 2b. De-Risking Study Contracts Have Been Placed with LM and BAES to Investigate the Options for Integrating CEC into the Two Platforms and their Existing/Planned Systems. a Review Note will Request Endorsement of the De-Risked Programme and Seek Approval for the Release of Additional Funds from Existing EP Provision to Support the Remaining Assessment Phase. Main Gate Approval will be Sought Once the Work Being Carried Out in the Assessment Phase Has Reached Maturity. Further Operational Analysis Work and a Review of Technology Assumptions Since the Initial Gate Approval in 2000, Has also Been Commissioned.</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
</Tr>
<tr>
</Tr>
<tr>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
55
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
25
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+30
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Explanation of the Need and Boundaries of Current Internal Planning Assumptions for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Latest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability will be Available</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">the Capability will Meet the Need to Counter Air Warfare Threats by Enhancing the Ability to Detect, Track, and Engage Air Targets, and to Contribute to the Single Integrated Tactical Picture. the Time Envelope for Provision of the Capability is Based on Cohesion with the US Programme, Forecast Production Rates and Platform Availability.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2d. Boundaries of Current Internal Cost Assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">the Figure Provided is a Most Likely One at this Stage of the Programme and may Reduce as the Engineering Solution and Installation Architecture Matures.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

174
