---
Year: 2011.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Page_from: 295.0
Page_to: 299.0
Project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2011_295_299.md
---
| Project Title                                  |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability           |                                             |
|                                                    |                                             |
| Team Responsible                               |                                             |
| Afloat Support                                     |                                             |
|                                                    |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner                       |                                             |
| Head of Capability Expeditionary Logistics Support |                                             |
|                                                    |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name                         | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability           | Pre-Main Investment Decision                |
|                                                    |                                             |

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH and SUSTAINABILITY

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Provide Afloat Logistic Support to UK and Allied Maritime Task Groups at Sea and their Amphibious Components Operating Ashore. Although not Strictly a Onefor-One Replacement Programme, New Vessels will Incrementally Replace Much of the Existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary Flotilla, as Ships Enter and Leave Service Respectively.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability is Designed to Support Three Distinct Types of Maritime Task Group: Carrier Strike, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Security. the Demands of Each Differ Significantly, but are all Composed of Three Common Elements:

Bulk Consumables - Fuel and Potable Water which are Transferred by Hose.

Non-Bulk Consumables - Food, Ammunition and General Stores. Solid Cargo which is Transferred in Unit Loads, Either Ship to Ship or Ship to Shore.

Forward Aviation Support - The Provision of Helicopter Basing and Operating Facilities to Accommodate some of the Task Group’s Aircraft or to Provide Operational Flexibility During a Campaign.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability will be in Service until Circa 2054 and as Such the Solution will be Designed to Accommodate the Requirements of Current and Known Future Force Structures, Including Type 45, the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers, Joint Combat Aircraft and Type 26 Global Combat Ship. Tankers will Provide Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group. Solid Support Ships, Previously Referred to as Fleet Solid Support and Amphibious Combat Stores Ship, will Provide Non Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group.

The Capability to be Provided is Essential to the Evolving Logistic Support Needs of the Royal Navy. the Proposed Procurement Profile of Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Ships Has Been Matched to this Need, the Initial Focus Being on the Double-Hulled Tankers which are Required in Order to Comply with International Maritime Environmental Standards.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme Received Formal Approval to Enter Its Assessment

Phase in July 2005 Based on an Alliance Strategy. Following a Review of the Procurement Strategy in 2007, the Alliance Strategy Was Terminated. a New Strategy, Based on a ‘competitive and Adaptive’
Approach, Was Approved and Reflected the Need to Procure the Tanker Element of the Programme Separately in Order to Comply with International Maritime Legislation. in Addition Approval Was Granted for the Designation and Delegation of the Heavy Replenishment at Sea Project as a Separate Category D Project. Solid Support Ships will Now Form a Separate Strategy to be Considered with Wider UK Industrial Interests. an Open International Competition Was Launched for the Design and Build of Up to Six Fleet Tankers but Was Cancelled Following the Department's Examination of Its Equipment Programme in 2008. a Review of the Requirements and Procurement Strategy Was Undertaken which Concluded that a more Open Procurement Strategy to Consider a Range of Possible Solutions and which Take Account of Current Market Conditions is more Likely to Secure Best Value for Money for the MOD. on this Basis a New Competition for Up to Six Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers Was Launched in October 2009.

The Current Approved Budget for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase is £44m and the Current Forecast for the Assessment Phase, Including Early Design and Requirement Work for Solid Support Ships is \\\ (Tanker\\\, Solid Support Ships,
\\\).

Due to the Planned Phased Nature of the Project, Support and Oversight for Military Afloat Reach and

Sustainability Tankers and Further Design Work on Subsequent Classes will Take Place after the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker Main Investment Decision, and the Current Total Forecast for this Later Work is \\\, (\\\ for Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers, \\\ for Solid Support Ships) Bringing the Total Expected Cost of Assessment Work and Later Design for Future Classes to \\\.

Project Summary Sheet

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH and SUSTAINABILITY

## A.3. Progress

A New Competition Was Launched in October 2009. Following Assessment of Initial Pre Qualification Questionnaires Six Companies Were Invited to Proceed to the Next Stage of the Competition which is Being Conducted over Three Stages using Competitive Dialogue Process. Stage 1 - Invitation to Submit Outline Solutions Took Place over March to September 2010. Stage 2 - Invitation to Submit Detailed Solutions Commenced in October 2010 and is Expected to Continue Through to Invitation to Submit Final Bids. at the 31st March 2011, There Were Five Companies Included in the Process Following the Withdrawal from the Competiton in 2010 of One Company, Flensburger Schiffbau-Gesellschaft (Germany); the Five Bidders Are: A&P Group Limited (UK), Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (Republic of Korea), Fincantieri (Itay), Hyundai Heavy Industries (Republic of Korea) and Knutsen OAS(UK) Limited.

Since the 31st March Two of These Companies, Knutsen OAS Ltd in June 2011 and A&P Group Ltd in August 2011 Have Withdrawn, Meaning that the Competition is Now Reduced from Five to Three Bidders. This will be Examined in MPR 2012.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Deliver Future Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships, Replacing the Current Capability, to Support the Future Royal Navy. Without the Support of These Ships, the Ability of the Royal Navy to Carry Out Global Operations will be Severely Restricted. Double Hulled Naval Tankers are Required as Soon as is Practicable to Comply with International Maritime Legislation;
The Royal Fleet Auxiliary Currently Operates Two Double Hulled Tankers and Four Single Hulled Tankers under Exemption from Legislation. the Number of Ships with Single Hulled Tanks Has Reduced from Six to Four in the Last Year as a Result of Strategic Defence and Securty Review. All Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships are Maintained to UK Regulatory and Classifications Standards; Should this Certification and Classification be Withdrawn for Single Hulled Tankers, their Operation Would Cease Immediately Leading to Severe Operational Limitations on the Ability of the Royal Navy to Operate Worldwide and in Anything but the Most Benign Environments. Foreign Nations Have Already Begun to Deny Port Access for Single Hulled Tankers and this Situation will be Exacerbated as a Consequence of any Environmental Incident, MOD Shipping Related or Not. Programming for Operations Takes Account of Environmental Restrictions as Well as Limitations on Ships Due to their Material State; for Example some of the Older Ships are Unable to Operate in Colder Climates Due to the Steel in their Ageing Hulls Becoming Brittle. These Ships will be Replaced as the Double Hulled Tanker Element of the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme is Delivered.

## A.5. Associated Projects

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 57%" />
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
<td>approval Status</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>international Competition, Competitive Dialogue</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

Project Summary Sheet

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH and SUSTAINABILITY

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Approved Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>
4
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>lowest</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>forecast /
Approved (£m)</Td>
<td>budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only) (£m)</Td>
<td>highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

## B.4. Unit Production Cost/Quantities Required

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>15</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>15</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>15</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>15</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

4 Includes Forecasted \\\ for Post Main Gate Assessment Work that is not yet Approved. the Actual Military

Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase Expenditure is Within Approved Budget

Project Summarty Sheet

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH and SUSTAINABILITY

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>july 2005</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract

Project Summary Sheet
