---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: WATCHKEEPER
page_from: 181.0
page_to: 188.0
project_label: Watchkeeper
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_181_188.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

WATCHKEEPER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

TACTICAL UNMANNED AIR VEHICLE

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Assistant Chief of the Air Staff

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Watchkeeper will provide the operational commander with a 24 hour, all weather, intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition and reconnaissance capability supplying accurate, timely and high quality imagery to support decision making. The system will consist of unmanned air vehicles, sensors, data links and ground control stations. Watchkeeper is planned to be delivered through an incremental programme to allow the system to benefit from both existing and developing sensors and air vehicle technology.

In July 2005, following an international competition, Thales (UK) was awarded the Watchkeeper Demonstration and Manufacture phase contract as prime contractor. Major project milestones completed to date include the System Design Review in December 2005, the Preliminary Design Review in July 2006 and the Critical Design Review of the air vehicle in December 2006. The System Critical Design Review was conducted in May 2007 and finalised in September 2007 with the completion of the de-icing Critical Design Review.

Key future events include the Automatic Take Off & Landing System demonstration which has been rescheduled for June 2008, taking into account the decision made to prioritise the development of the related Global Positioning Take-off & Landing System for the Hermes 450 Urgent Operational Requirement.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation

Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme 5</td>
<td>
2008
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

| Contractor(s)             | Contract Scope           | Contract Type | Procurement Route     |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Thales Defence Ltd, Weybridge | Demonstration to Manufacture | Firm price        | International competition |

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
898
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
920
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-22
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>-5</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Redefinitions</td>
<td>Reduction in Cost of Capital figure due to reprofiling of funding as result of Options.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>+2</td>
<td>Changed Budgetary Priorities</td>
<td>Increase in Cost due to re-profiling of funding as result of Options.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-5</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Redefinitions</td>
<td>Reduction in Cost of Capital figure due to a revision in accruals included within the forecast cost.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>Change in associated project</td>
<td>Delay in start date of Defence Estates tasks into 2007/08.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-13</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (70%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-22</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
281
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2009/2010
</td>
<td>
2010/2011
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
0.943
</td>
<td>54</td>
<td>
54
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
One sub-unit trained and equipped to support a Medium Scale of Effort deployment.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
December 2010
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
February 2011
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-2
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+6
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>February 2008</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</td>
<td>
Agreement to provide underpinning design data has reduced

airworthiness and

Release To Service risks
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Alternative Trials arrangements now contracted</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>November 2007</td>
<td>+9</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Changes to the planned trials site have caused delays to Trials and Evaluation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-8</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th></th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3"></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall have at least a 95% probability of detecting all 5 of 5 static NATO standard tank targets within an open area of 4 km<sup>2</sup> in no more than 8 minutes.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
In support of unit operations Watchkeeper shall have at least a 95%
probability of identifying all 5 of 5 static NATO standard tank targets within a 4 km<sup>2</sup> area within 30 minutes of receipt of tasking.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
To concurrently support two Medium Scale operations (one of 6 months duration and one enduring), Watchkeeper shall provide imagery and imagery intelligence concurrently to at least 8 Headquarters comprising a total of at least 10 Tasking Users throughout the battlespaces of 2 disparate operational theatres.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall satisfy its tasking, worldwide, day and night, under climatic conditions A2, A3, B1, B2, B3, C0 and C1 as defined in Defence Standard 00-35 and Defence Standard 00-970.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall satisfy its tasking, worldwide, day and night, on surface targets located at up to 4000m altitude Above Mean Sea Level International Standard Atmosphere.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall be transportable by two C130J Mk 4 to support theatre entry force operations for one Battlefield Misson.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall not constrain the tactical mobility of its Users.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall satisfy its tasking for 24 hours per day for a period of at least 14 days with an Operational Availability of at least 85%.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall enable training for War fighting Operations.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
10
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall exchange data with Bowman and dependent Battlefield Information System Applications to at least NATO interoperability level 3 (seamless sharing of data).
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
11
</td>
<td>
Watchkeeper shall provide the location of static targets to within an absolute targeting error not exceeding 10 m in the horizontal circular error (at 90% confidence levels).
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
91 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
-1
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 10</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>The data exchange in the KUR is of a tactical nature (ie reports on tasking, intelligence, airspace etc), rather than Unmanned Air Vehicle control at NATO

Interoperability level 3 which is not required or sensible and requires amendment – the

revised KUR is currently on target to be met.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 11</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Quantities of Electro Optical/Infra-Red sensors with laser range finders require re-negotiation. Minor risk, expected to be resolved for Initial Operating Capability.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Watchkeeper is a consolidation of the Sender and Spectator projects. Initial Gate approval was received for Sender in November 1999 and approval for a joint Assessment Phase for both projects was given in July 2000.

The acquisition strategy has been based on selecting Unmanned Air Vehicle systems to suit a defined capability requirement rather than an air vehicle-centred approach. Through evaluation and system concept demonstration, the Assessment Phase has driven down technical and schedule risks and derived the whole life costs associated with the proposed options. User and System Requirements were identified and revalidated. Trade-off activity was undertaken, taking full account of the impact across all Lines of Development and supported by balance of investment studies.

Alternative acquisition options have been considered. PPP/PFI was not deemed appropriate for the provision of a tactical capability deployed in theatre, due to the potential risks to contractor personnel and the required levels of availability as well as legal implications. Collaboration was explored during the early stages of the Assessment Phase, but it was not possible to align requirements. There is continuing dialogue with and between allied nations on matters of requirement definition, technology, operational experience and acquisition. The need for significant system integration with the emerging Network Enabled Capability requirements led the Defence Procurement Agency and the potential contractors to adopt an incremental approach. This approach also supports the Force Readiness Cycle and provides for a phased uplift of capability at discrete intervals.

Opportunities to enhance Watchkeeper beyond the Full Operating Capability have been considered during the Assessment Phase and will inform future investment decisions.

Following a competitive process, Thales (UK) was announced as preferred bidder in July 2004. The programme completed the Assessment Phase of the acquisition cycle in July 2005, when Main Gate approval was given to proceed to the Demonstration and Manufacture phase.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 65                        | 7%                                                        |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 52                        | 6%                                                        |
| Variation                     | +13                       |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 2005
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
November 1999
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
68
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>881</td>
<td>907</td>
<td>920</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate<a href="fn1"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Initial Gate forecasts are only available for the Sender element of the programme. These have been omitted as any comparison to the current programme could be misleading.<a href="fnref1"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
February 2010
</td>
<td>June 2010</td>
<td>
February 2011
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate<sup></sup></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
