---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Support Projects
Project: Bowman
Page_from: 262.0
Page_to: 271.0
Project_label: Bowman
Project_type_label: Support Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_262_271.md
---
## A.4. Capability Risks

Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme is the Principal Land, Air Manoeuvre and Littoral Tactical Command and Control Capability, Enabling the Planning and Execution of Operations at all Levels at or Below Divisional Level. Without this Programme the Armed Forces Would be Unable to Undertake any Form of Land-Based Operations, Including Current Operations.

## A.5. Associated Projects - Not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="3">post-Main Investment Decision Projects</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
General Dynamics United Kingdom Ltd
</Td>
<td>
Demonstration and Manufacture
</Td>
<td>
Firm Price
</Td>
<td>
International Competition
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

### A.7.1. Support Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th Colspan="4"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>the Approved Long Term Support Strategy Increment One Covers the Period April 2009 – March 2011 and Comprises
:</Td>
<td Colspan="4">
Logistics (Maintenance &amp; Supply). Provided via Forward and Depth Maintenance Concepts, with Supply of Spares Through the Purple Gate at the Defence Storage and Distribution Centre Bicester. in-Depth Repair is Provided by the Original Equipment Manufacturers under Commercial Arrangements Put in Place by General Dynamics UK Ltd Design Services. Used to Analyse Underlying Problems from Incident Trends in the Field (Identified Through Service Management Below) and Develop Solutions. Operates Proactive Obsolescence Management at the Component, Product and System Level Through the Supply Chain. Finally, Maintains and where Appropriate Improves System Safety and Security Accreditation Service Management. Bowman is Software Intensive and Provides Information Based Services to the User. the Information Technology Infrastructure Library Service Management Framework Has Been Adopted to Implement Processes for Incident Management, Problems Management, Release, Change Management and Configuration Control. Logistic Information System. Uses Existing Logistic Information Systems. the Bowman Asset Configuration Management System is a Bespoke System Developed to Address a Gap in Configuration Management in the Land Environment. This Gap is Planned to be Filled by an Enhancement to Joint Asset Management and Engineering Solutions (Land Increment Two in the 2012 to 2014 Timeframe, at which Point the Bowman Asset Configuration Management System will be Withdrawn.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>long Term Support Strategy Increment Two</Td>
<td Colspan="4">
PR08 Funding Restraints Meant that a Through Life Capability Funding Model Could not be Approved at that Time. as a Result of Funding Approved in PR10 a Main Gate Approval will be Sought in 2010 for a Longer Term Sustainment Package. Plans to Transform the Support Solution in Line with a Contracting for Availability Model will Depend on the Future Funding Profile of the Programme.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>contract Scope</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
General Dynamics United Kingdom (GD(UK))
</Td>
<td>support</Td>
<td>
Prime Contract
</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bowman</Td>
<td>130</Td>
<td>397</Td>
<td>+267</Td>
<td>6.1%</Td>
<td>16.5%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bowman</Td>
<td>
1874
</Td>
<td>
1898
</Td>
<td>
2041
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year

Variation

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bowman</Td>
<td>2041</Td>
<td>2082</Td>
<td>+41</Td>
<td>+42</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>2041</Td>
<td>2082</Td>
<td>+41</Td>
<td>+42</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Bowman

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>august 2009</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>
Reduced Estimates of Bowman Equipment to be Transferred to Other Projects
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>april 2009</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Adjustment for Equipment Procured under Other Approval Budgets
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>april 2009</Td>
<td>+21</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Changes to Fielding Plan Arising from Operational Tempo
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>february 2009 (Historic)</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Extended Conversion Facilities Due to Platform Unavailability and Additional Equipment Required for Changes to Platform Design
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2008 (Historic)</Td>
<td>+27</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>
Increase in Cost of Capital Charge from Extended Conversion Facilities and Slippage to Support Vehicle and Fielding Programmes with Resultant Delay to Final Deliveries.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>contracting Process</Td>
<td>
Revised Prices as a Result of Activities Completing at a Lesser Cost than Originally Estimated.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-8</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>
Items Acquired under Contract Now Provided as New Requirements to Other Projects
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>
Increase in Cost of Capital Charge Arising from Mis-Stated Closing Balance in Previous MPR
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>changed Budgetary Requirements</Td>
<td>
Funding Brought Forward to Reflect Contractor Progress. Cost of Capital Charge Reductions
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>(-£6m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+120</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>technical Requirements Revaluated (+£90m). Associated Reprofile of Funding and Asset Balances Resulted in Increased Cost of Capital Charge (+£30m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-29</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>additional Technical Requirements not Scoped as Part of the Original Supply and Support Contract (+£61m). Technical Support Requirements not Originally Included in Main Gate Approval (+£10m). Additional Technical Requirements not Covered under Terms of Supply and Support Contract (+£16m). Removal of Requirements to be Accounted for as Separate Projects (-£17m). Estimated Impact of Total Fleet Requirements (-£17m). Additional Technical Requirements not Covered under Terms of Supply and Support Contract (+ £5m). Items Acquired under Contract Now Provided as New Requirements to Other Projects (-£73m). Support Related Activity Incorrectly Included in Forecast (£-14m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+15</Td>
<td>contracting Process</Td>
<td>revised Prices for Global Positioning System Modules (+£3m). Difference Between Approved D&amp;M Cost at Main Gate and Contract Price (+£12m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>procurement Strategy</Td>
<td>contract Incentivisation for Achieving Key Events Leading to ISD (+£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+11</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>cost of Capital Charge Reduced Due to Accounting for Deliveries Ahead of Programmed Profile.(£17m). Figure Adjusted Following Error of
+£5m in MPR05. Reprofile of Funding and Asset Balances Resulted in Increased Cost of Capital Charge (+£23m). COSVAT Adjustment (+£5m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-143</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate (-£143m). Figure Adjusted Following Error of £5m in MPR05.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>+41</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – not Applicable

## B.4. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Colspan="2">unit Production Costs (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">quantities Required</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>at Main Investment Decision</Th>
<th>currently</Th>
<th>at Main Investment Decision</Th>
<th>currently</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bowman</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>48000 Radios of Varying Type</Td>
<td>42000 Radios of Varying Type</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support/ Service/ PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost</Th>
<th>forecast Cost</Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bowman/Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme Long Term Support Strategy Increment 1</Td>
<td>127</Td>
<td>122</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
<td>-5</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support/ Service/ PFI Cost

### B.5.1.1. Bowman

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>
Non Emergent Risks Identified in Main Gate Business Case
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>
Cost of Capital Charge Reduced Due to Applied Depreciation on Capital Spares Purchased
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td>
Changed

Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
Revised Capital Spares Requirement
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>june 2009</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>hm Treasury Reserve</Td>
<td>
Reclaimed Conflict Prevention Fund Expenditure
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>may 2009</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>
Changed

Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>
Repair Expenditure on Operations
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.5.2. Operational Impact of Support /Service/PFI Cost Variations – not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 48%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2009</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2010</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>397</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>397</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>2145</Td>
<td>10</Td>
<td>2155</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>57</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure (£m)</Td>
<td>2542</Td>
<td>67</Td>
<td>2609</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>actual Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase (Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bowman</Td>
<td>august 2001</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>earliest Forecast / Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)</Th>
<th>latest Forecast / Approved</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>bowman</Td>
<td>february 2004</Td>
<td>march 2004</Td>
<td>december 2004</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date

### C.3.1. Definition

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">description</Th>
<th Colspan="3">
In-Service Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">bowman</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
A Brigade Headquarters, Two Mechanized Battalions
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="3">
And Support Troops Capable of Engaging in Operations Other than War
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
### C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td>approved Date</Td>
<td>actual Date</Td>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>in-Year Variation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>bowman</Td>
<td>december 2004</Td>
<td>march 2004</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1. Bowman

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>
Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – not Applicable

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation – not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – not Applicable

## C.5. Support Contract

### C.5.1. Scope of Support Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>long Term Support Strategy Increment 1</Td>
<td>
Design Services Technical Authority Including;

<ul>
<li>security Process Documentation</Li>
<li>safety Cases, Notices and Database for Safety Issues</Li>
<li>technology Reviews</Li>
</Ul>

Supply Support Services Including:

<ul>
<li>inventory Optimisation, Attrition Spares, Services and Warehousing;</Li>
<li>storage, Services and Manning Associated with Operations</Li>
<li>demand Management and Forecasting;</Li>
<li>inventory/Catalogue Management</Li>
</Ul>

Field Engineer Services Including;

<ul>
<li>product, Platform &amp; System Support;</Li>
<li>system of Systems Failure Analysis</Li>
<li>support of Units Prior to and Return from Operations</Li>
</Ul>

Sustainment Integrated Logistic Support Including;

<ul>
<li>supply Chain Characteristics for the Calculation of Optimised Spares Quantities</Li>
<li>produce the Bowman Integrated Electronic Technical Publication</Li>
<li>outputs from the Sustainment Activities to Determine a Through Life Support Package</Li>
</Ul>

Sustainment Information Services Including.

<ul>
<li>logistic Support Analysis</Li>
<li>on-Line Logistics Information System Helpdesk • Field Support</Li>
</Ul></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>support to User Exercises and Trials. Engineering Change Training Including;
<ul>
<li>training Needs/Option/Gap Analysis;</Li>
<li>production and Maintenance of Courseware;</Li>
<li>update the Authority’s Trainers</Li>
</Ul>
Maintenance Services Including;
<ul>
<li>level 3 and Level 4 Repairs</Li>
<li>full Screening of all Returned Equipment at One Point of Entry</Li>
</Ul>
Design Services Within Support. Including;
<ul>
<li>test and Reference Engineering</Li>
<li>incident Reporting, Service Desk Provision</Li>
<li>support Engineering, Obsolescence Management</Li>
</Ul></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2. Progress Against Approved Support Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>
Actual Date
</Th>
<th>variation (Month)</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (Month)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>long Term Support Strategy Increment One</Td>
<td>
April 2009
</Td>
<td>
April 2009
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1. Go-Live Date Variation – not Applicable

### C.5.3. Progress Against Approved End of Support Contract Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>variation</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>end of Long Term Support Strategy Increment One</Td>
<td>
31 March 2011
</Td>
<td>
31 March 2011
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.3.1. End of Contract Date Variation – not Applicable

### C.5.4. Operational Impact of Support Contract Variation – not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

### D.1.1. Bowman

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Maturity Area
</Th>
<th>
Maturity Scale
</Th>
<th>last Years Assessment</Th>
<th>current Assessment</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Commercial
</Td>
<td Rowspan="3"></Td>
<td Colspan="3" Rowspan="3">
<em>measures under Development</Em>
</Td>
<td Rowspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Financial
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project Management
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
System Readiness
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Technology Readiness
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">line of Development</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Forecast
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
To be Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
50. Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Sustain Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme Capability Through the
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>delivery of Equipment Updates and Upgrades as Necessary.</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>51. Training</Td>
<td>sustain a Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme Training Programme that Delivers the Necessary Outputs (Numbers and Level of Training) to Meet Force Readiness Requirements.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>52. Logistics</Td>
<td>meet in-Service Equipment Availability Metrics, Through Support Processes, that are Necessary to Meet Force Readiness Requirements.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>53. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>sustain Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme -Specific Infrastructure to Enable Training, Support and Equipment Development Activities.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>54. Personnel</Td>
<td>ensure Sufficient Numbers of Correctly Trained Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme Users, Including for Training and System Development, are Available to Meet Force Readiness Requirements.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>55. Doctrine</Td>
<td>have in Place Documentation Explaining How Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme will be Used to Deliver Operational Effect.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>56. Organisation</Td>
<td>ensure Operational and Nonoperational Organisations and Governance Processes are in Place to Deliver Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme Capability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>57. Information</Td>
<td>provision of Data, Information and Knowledge Necessary to Deliver the Bowman and Common Battlefield Application Toolset, Digitisation Battlespace Land Infrastructure and Platform Battlefield Information System Application Programme Capability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
100%
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation –not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Bowman

### D.3.1.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">kur</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">lod</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Forecast
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Secure Voice.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Secure Data.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Automatic Position Location, Navigation and Reporting Service.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Security.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Ease of Use.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Provide Automated System Management Enabling Support to the Full Spectrum of Operations.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Data Communications Infrastructure.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Support the Common Infrastructure for Battlefield Information Systems Concept and Provide a Common Operating Environment for Digitization Stage 2.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Allow the Free-Flow of Data and Voice Within and Between Vehicles, Groups of Stationary Vehicles, and Other Systems.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-10</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Provide a Secure and Robust Tactical Internet Service Making Efficient Use of Limited Bandwidth.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>11</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Bowman is to Support Current Operational C2 Doctrine, Practice, Deployment and Battle Procedure.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>12</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Bowman is to Provide Interfaces to Other Key Battlefield Communication Systems Used at the Tactical Level
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>13</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Bowman Equipment is to Meet a Level of Survivability Consistent with Its Physical Environment and Mission Criticality for 95% of Users in 95%
Of Likely Climatic Conditions.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>14</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Make Effective, Robust Use of the ElectroMagnetic Spectrum without Degrading Other Systems.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>15</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Bowman is to Provide Working Installations in all Platforms Designated as Containing Bowman Equipment, Except for Ships, Westland Attack 64 and Lynx Helicopters for which Equipment is to be Provided but not Installed.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>16</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Health and Safety.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>17</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Supportability
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>18</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>19</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Bowman is to Supply Sufficient Scales of Equipment and Services to Meet the Needs of Those Forces Taking Part in or Supporting Land Operations, as Structures at End of Supply.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">percentage Currently Met</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
100%
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">in-Year Change</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Measure</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>comment</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 1 – Secure Voice</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>recovered from ‘at Risk’ in MPR07. the Technical Solution for Voice</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>arbitration Was Successfully Tested, Trialled and Accepted into Service.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 12 –
Interoperability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>recovered from ‘at Risk’ in MPR07. New Technical Solution Successfully Tested, Trialled and Delivered into Service.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 12 –
Interoperability</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>new Solution Agreed and Developed to Meet the Performance Standard. to be Trialled During Operational Field Trials</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 1 – Secure Voice</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>user Continues to Experience Voice/Voice Arbitration Interference. Technical Solution, Whilst Tested in the Laboratory, will be Tested at Scale During Operational Field Trials.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of Variation – not Applicable

### D.3.2. Support Contract

### D.3.2.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Supply Support – 90% Spares Availability
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Incident Reporting
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>8</Td>
<td>
Service Desk Satisfaction &amp; Response Times
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
Regular Obsolescence Reviews
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation – not Applicable

### D.3.2.3. Operational Impact of Variation – not Applicable

C VEHICLE PFI

Team Responsible

Service Provision Project Team

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability (Expeditionary Logistic Support)

Senior Responsible Officer

| Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre) |
|--------------------------------------------|
|                                            |

Number of Projects / Increments

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Support Contract – C Vehicle PFI

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Armed Forces Require a Range of Support Vehicles to Support both Peacetime and Wartime Operations. the Previous C Vehicle Fleet Comprised over 4000 Items of 150 Types Such as Rough Terrain Earthmoving Equipment, Specialist Engineer Construction Plant as Well as Field Material Handling Equipment. These are Held at Varying Degrees of Military Readiness and are Capable of Undertaking a Wide Range of Combat Support, Logistic and Construction Tasks. the Majority of the Fleet is Commercial Off the Shelf, which Has Been Modified to Meet the Military Requirement. the Fleet Suffered in Part from Low Availability Due to Heavy Use Whilst Other Elements of the Fleet Were Only Required for Infrequent Contingencies and Were Consequently under Utilised. These Arrangements Were Far from Ideal and a PFI Solution Was Agreed to Address this Issue.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Initial Gate Approval Was Granted in November 2000 Based on Pre Qualification Questionnaire Documentation from Six Consortia. Three Short-Listed Contenders Were Chosen to Receive the Invitation to Negotiate Released in March 2001. Throughout this Period a Process Called ‘convergence’ Was Used to Acquaint Industry with the Requirement and also to Gain Feedback on Alternative Solutions. the Invitation to Negotiate Responses Were Assessed Against Specified Criteria. at this Time, the Three Contenders Reduced to Two, as Two Bidders Combined to Propose a Consolidated Bid. a Further Round of Revise and Confirm Offers Was Requested in May 2002 with Responses from the Two Consortia (Amey Lex Consortia and Fastex) in June 2002.

The Evaluation of the Two Bids (ALC and FastEx) Against the Public Sector Comparator Was Completed in Early 2003 Before Final Submission of the Main Gate Business Case to the Investment Approvals Board in March 2003. Whilst Awaiting the Investment Appraisals Board and Ministerial Decision, No Interaction Could Take Place with the Bidders, However Specific Elements of the Requirement Were Reviewed to Address any Inconsistencies and Implement Additional Risk Reduction Measures. This Process Led to the Revised Preferred Bidder Documentation Published in December 2003. at the Time of Announcing the Main Gate Decision to Proceed with ALC, it Was also Recognised that a Funding Gap Had Been Created by the Constraint Placed in the Used of IRDEL (Non-Cash) by HM Treasury. the Funding Requirements Were Discussed with ALC as the Initial Part of the Contracts Negotiations and with the Directors Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre and Expeditionary Logistics and Support).

## A.3. Progress

The Contract Was Signed on 10 June 2005 with ALC (SPC) Limited. the Operational Feasibility Test Was Successfully Completed and in-Service Date Declared on 31 March 2006. the Remainder of the Implementation Rollout Phases Were all Completed on Time Leading to Full Service Commencement in May 2006. Through Fleet Management the C Vehicle Fleet Today Comprises 2,111 Items of 150 Types. the Equipment Refurbishment and Replacement Programme Schedule Has Been Amended in some Areas Since Contract Commencement to Ensure Best Value for Money is Achieved.
