---
year: 2008.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: INDIRECT FIRE PRECISION ATTACK
page_from: 207.0
page_to: 210.0
project_label: Indirect Fire Precision Attack
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2008_207_210.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

| Picture not available. |
|----------------------------|

INDIRECT FIRE PRECISION ATTACK

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

ARTILLERY SYSTEMS

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

Indirect Fire Precision Attack will provide, by incremental acquisition, a suite of munitions for indirect precision attack of static, mobile, and manoeuvring targets, extending to ranges in excess of 150 kilometres.

The capability required under Indirect Fire Precision Attack will be delivered through a structured programme of Assessment, Demonstration and Manufacture phases. In light of the incremental nature of the programme, a revised approach to the overall Indirect Fire Precision Attack strategy has been agreed with approval for a continuing Assessment Phase leading to the procurement of individual components via a series of Main Gate Business Cases. A Main Gate Business Case for the first component, a 155mm Ballistic Sensor Fused Munition, was approved in July 2007, with a target In Service Date of September 2011. The second component will be the Loitering Munition (see Section 2c below).

The Assessment Phase is indicating that the Indirect Fire Precision Attack capability is expected to be achieved by a mixture of guided rockets, enhanced artillery shells and Loitering Munitions, using a variety of different payloads (Loitering Munitions are unmanned airborne vehicles with a warhead, designed to fly in a holding pattern after launching until deployed, with a man-in-theloop controller, to a target). Indirect Fire Precision Attack munitions will be used by the Multiple Launch Rocket System, the AS90 self-propelled howitzer \[the future Lightweight Mobile Artillery Weapon System Rocket Launcher\]
and in the case of Loitering Munitions possibly as a standalone platform. The mix of munitions procured under the programme will have a range of InService Dates: this multi-solution approach will be managed through an incrementally based procurement strategy.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e Main Gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Initial Gate Business Case for Indirect Fire Precision Attack was approved in May 2001. Following competition using a Capability Based Questionnaire, an Assessment Phase contract was awarded in May 2002 to a consortium of companies led by BAE Systems Strategic Capability Solutions (BAE Systems Future Systems). This first Assessment Phase was designed to provide, and iteratively update, a ‘Route Map’ to achieving the full Indirect Fire Precision Attack capability with recommendations about the type, quantities and mix of munitions.

In line with the approved Indirect Fire Precision Attack strategy for an incremental programme, a series of Assessment Phases will be conducted, each being approved by a separate Review Note.

A contract for the second Assessment Phase was placed with the BAE Systems Strategic Capability Solutions (BAE Systems Future Systems) led consortium in January 2007. This included the Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration programme, which is due to complete in late 2008.

In light of the incremental procurement strategy, procurement of components will be approved via a series of Main Gate Business Cases. After each component receives Main Gate approval, it is split out as a separate programme in its own right. However, each capability will continue to be included in the ongoing operational analysis work, so that the overall mix and quantity of munitions to be procured can be refined as the programme progresses. In the case of Loitering Munitions, further Assessment Phase work is required in the short term which will be delivered as part of the Complex Weapons Assessment Phase. This was submitted for approval to the Investment Approvals Board early in Financial Year 2008/09.

A contract for the Demonstration and Manufacture of the first component, Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition, was placed with Gesellschaft für Intelligente Wirksysteme mbH in September 2007.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
212<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
24<a href="fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+188
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Includes costs for Assessment Phase 2, Loitering Munition Capability Demonstration of £49m which was approved in June 2006 review note, and costs resulting from the Complex Weapon Assessment Phase.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
<li id="fn2">Covers approval of Assessment Phase 1. Due to the incremental nature of the programme, this approval does not include other assessment phase activities.<a href="fnref2"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Earliest | Latest |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Envelope within which capability will be available                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | \\\       | \\\     |
| This project will provide the MoD with an indirect fire precision attack capability, to be acquired on an incremental basis. The above dates relate to the current planning assumptions for the second increment of the Indirect Fire Precision Attack programme, that is the introduction into service (initial operating capability) of the Loitering Munition. The assumption has changed from MPR07 due to Ballistic Sensor Fuzed Munition achieving Main Gate and becoming a programme in its own right. |              |            |

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
