---
year: 2006.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: MILITARY AFLOAT REACH AND SUSTAINABILTY
page_from: 173.0
page_to: 174.0
project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2006_173_174.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH AND SUSTAINABILTY

Picture not available

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

MARS

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability: N/A

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>MARS will investigate a wide range of solutions to provide the logistic support requirements of the future Royal Navy and sea-based support to deployed forces. MARS vessels will play a significant part in providing sea-based support to amphibious, land and air forces in the littoral where Host Nation Support is absent or limited. As the MARS vessels come into service, they will replace the current Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) vessels as they are gradually withdrawn from service. MARS vessels will provide three capabilities:

x Bulk Consumables – the provision of fuel, oils, lubricants, ammunition, food, water and air stores to embarked forces. x Joint Sea Based Logistics - the provision of logistic support from afloat to Joint Forces ashore. x Forward Aviation Support - the provision of support to maritime rotary-wing operations and support to amphibious rotorcraft operations, as well as the provision of operational maintenance support for deployed helicopters.

MARS plans to deliver first up to five dedicated tankers followed by a number of other vessels. The actual number and type of vessels required will be determined during the Assessment Phase. These ships will be double hulled to comply with environmental requirements.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made ie Main Gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The MARS project received formal approval to enter its Assessment Phase in July 2005.

The preferred contractual route for meeting the MARS requirement is to create a form of alliance (or Delivery Team) with a lead contractor (the Integrator). The contract will be developed with Industry to include continuous communications and engagement, to identify and apportion appropriate ownership of risk, and allow visibility and access to the entire supply chain and shares in cost savings.

167

The MARS Assessment Phase will cover generic assessment and design activity for the whole programme and the initial design for the first class of ships. Additionally, the Assessment Phase will be used to select the alliance team or teams for the MARS programme.

The MARS ships are expected to be procured in distinct phases, with class 1 and each subsequent class being approved by separate submissions to the Department’s Investment Approvals Board.

It is intended that the design of class 1 will be developed to a high enough level to enable manufacture to start as soon as the main investment decision is made. Due to the planned phased nature of the project, further design on subsequent classes will take place after the main investment decision, and an early estimate for this is
\\\. This brings the total expected cost of Assessment work and later design for future classes to\\\, subject to more detailed investigations into the nature of future classes and the level of design to be undertaken. The procurement approach and contractual arrangements are all derisked pre Main Gate.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
44
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
FROM
</th>
<th>
TO
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">The MARS programme will replace a large number of existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary vessels. The capability is essential for the effective deployment of the Royal Navy and replaces existing ships that will be otherwise operating outwith Maritime Pollution (Marpol) regulations at ages well beyond their design life.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
FROM
</th>
<th>
TO
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

168
