---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate Projects
Project: Lynx Wildcat
Page_from: 131.0
Page_to: 141.0
Project_label: Lynx Wildcat
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_131_141.md
---
Team Responsible

Lynx Wildcat

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability (Air and Littoral Manoeuvre) – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Requirement

Head of Capability (Above Water Effects) – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Requirement

Senior Responsible Officer

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

Number of Projects / Increments

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision – Nil • Post Main Investment Decision – Lynx Wildcat Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter and Lynx Wildcat Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft • Support Contract -
Nil • Other – Please Provide Details - Nil

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Lynx Wildcat Capability Was Developed to Meet the Requirements for a Dedicated Small Helicopter for Use in both the Land (Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Requirement) and Maritime (Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Requirement) Environments to Replace the Current Lynx Fleet which is Reaching Its Life End. Lynx Wildcat is a Single-Source, Combined Helicopter Procurement Programme with Westland Helicopters Ltd which Follows More Effective Contracting Principles. Project Approval is for 80 Aircraft, with Funding for 62 Held by the Integrated Project Team.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Initial Gate Approval Was Given in December 2001 for the Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter and in

September 2002 for the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft. Following Review under the Future Rotorcraft Programme the Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter Requirement Matured into the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter Requirement.

Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter:

The Assessment Phase Benchmarked Westland Helicopter Ltd’s Lynx Wildcat Proposal Against Alternative Off-the-Shelf Solutions from Other Potential Suppliers, and Required the Company to Demonstrate the Necessary Level of Performance to Successfully Deliver the Demonstration
& Manufacture Phase.

Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft:

A Single Tender Contract Was Placed with Westland Helicopter Ltd to Develop and De-Risk their Lynx Wildcat Proposal to Meet the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Requirement in Conjunction with the Approved Battlefield Light Utility Helicopter Programme.

Procurement Strategy:

Two Procurement Strategies Were Considered. the First Was to Run a Competition and Second, to Pursue the Westland Helicopter Lynx Wildcat Proposal on a Single Tender Basis - With an Option to Switch from Single Tender to Competition Should the Assessment Phase Indicate that the Lynx Wildcat Solution Was Unlikely to be Cost Effective. the Second Strategy Was the Selected One.

The Result of the Assessment Phase Considered the Lynx Wildcat to be the Most Likely of the Options to Deliver the Required Capability by the in Service Date. This Gave the Benefit of Maintaining Industrial Capability in the UK. Hence a Single Tender Approach Was Judged Most Likely to Offer both the Best Technical Solution and Best Value for Money Overall.

The Assessment Phase Successfully De-Risked a Number of Key Requirements, Including Secure Communications, Mission Systems and Engine Certification. Furthermore, Westland Helicopter Ltd’s Super Lynx 300 Export Programme Demonstrated their Capability to Insert New T-800 Engines, Glass Cockpit and Avionics into the Lynx Aircraft.

## A.3. Progress

Within the Department the Aircraft are to be Known as Wildcat Mk1 (Army Helicopter) and Wildcat Mk1 (Helicopter Maritime Attack).

The Demonstration & Manufacture Contract Was Let in June 2006 to Deliver 70 Aircraft: 40 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters for the Army and 30 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft for the Navy with Costed Options for Five more Platforms of Each Type. Preliminary, Interim,Air Vehicle and Air Vehicle & Mission Systems Critical Design Reviews Were Successfully Achieved in January 2007,

October 2007, April 2008 and August 2009 Respectively. the First Airframe Was Delivered to the

Westland Build Line in November 2008 and a Successful \`first Flight\`
Was Achieved in November 2009 in Accordance with the Schedule Contracted in June 2006. Significant Future Milestones Are: Support & Training Approval in Late 2010 and Contract Award in Early 2011. the Equipment Examination Concluded that Reductions Could be Realised in Procurement Costs if the Quantities Were Reduced to 34 Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters and 28 Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft, with the Impact on Delivered Capability Minimised Through Introducing Design Changes to Achieve Greater Versatility Between the Two Aircraft Variants. the Protracted Period of Uncertainty Surrounding the Project Ended in December 2008 with the Ministerial Announcement Confirming that the Project Would Proceed to Full Scale Production. a Planning Round 2010 Option Was Run to Addresses the Legislative and Safety Requirement to Fit all Combat Aircraft Including Helicopters with Fuel System Survivability Measures.

Through-Life Training & Support Solutions are to be Developed as Part of the Project. an Information Note Was Approved in July 2007 to Submit the Support Solution Review Note in September 2009. Approval Was also Given for the Training Service Initial Gate Business Case in August 2007 Based on the 4-Stage PFI Treasury Approval Process. While Investigating Alternative Ways to Deliver the Lynx Wildcat Capability During the Equipment Examination, the Opportunity to Deliver Reduced Through Life Costs Was Identified. a Review Note Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in December 2008 and Approved in January 2009, Detailing a New Strategy to Explore a Single Source, Integrated Support Solution and Training Delivery Service Through the Aircraft Manufacturer, AgustaWestland and Reflects a Revised Recommendation Submission Date to the Investment Approvals Board in Late 2010, Leading to a Potential Contract Award in Early 2011. Logistic Support and Ready for Training Dates Remain Unchanged and are Planned for December 2011 and January 2013 Respectively.

## A.4. Capability Risks

These Projects Provide Ongoing Light Helicopter Capability in the Land, Maritime & Littoral Environments, Beyond the Out of Service Dates of the Current Lynx Helicopter Fleet and Introduce an Enhanced Maritime &
Littoral Attack Capability. the Reduction in Aircraft Quantities Arising from the Equipment Examination is Predicated Upon a more Versatile Design Solution Allowing both Aircraft Variants to be Utilised Across a Wider Range of Roles and Environments, but with some Minor Trade-Off Against the Achieved Performance. This will Place a Greater Necessity on the Need to Manage the Two Variants Within a Common in-Service Framework with Commonality Within the Defence Lines of Development

## A.5. Associated Projects – not Applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>description</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>westland Helicopters Ltd, Yeovil</Td>
<td>demonstration to Manufacture</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee with a

Maximum Price
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

### A.7.1. Support / Service / PFI Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 0%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">-</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Lynx Wildcat
</Td>
<td>
Westland

Helicopters Ltd, Yeovil</Td>
<td>
In-Service

Training and Support</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
To be Confirmed
</Td>
<td>
Non-
Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project</Td>
<td>59</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>3.5%</Td>
<td>3.4%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>59</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>3.5%</Td>
<td>3.4%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project</Td>
<td>
1760
</Td>
<td>
1901
</Td>
<td>
1966
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year

Variation

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project</Td>
<td>1966</Td>
<td>1689</Td>
<td>-277</Td>
<td>+20</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>1966</Td>
<td>1689</Td>
<td>-277</Td>
<td>+20</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Lynx Wildcat

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
<td>
Due to Changes in the Funding Profile of the Project the Cost of Capital Charge Has Increased.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>+10</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirement
</Td>
<td>
Planning Round 2010 Option – Rotary Wing – Fuel System Survivability Measures
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>december 2009</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
<td>
The Level of Risk which Has Materialised Has not Been as Great as Anticipated Within the Main Gate Business Case.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-8</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Lynx Wildcat Programme Cost Reduction Related to Funding Reprofiling Within Helicopter Cluster
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>-194</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Planning Round 2009 Option – Lynx Wildcat Descope and Reduce Numbers from 80 to 62
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>-40</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Reduced Cost of Capital as a Result of Option and Changes in Cost Profile Between Current and Future Years
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions
</Td>
<td>
Increase in Cost of Capital Due to Reprofiling of Lifetime Expenditure, Delivery Schedule, Updated Accrual Model and Subsequent Capitalisation of RDEL Costs Approved at Main Gate.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary Priorities
</Td>
<td>
Increased Cost of Capital Due to Increased Year End Outturn Ahead of Schedule.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>-65</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>
Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) Figure and Highest Acceptable (not to Exceed) Estimates at Main Gate.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</Td>
<td>-277</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 67%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat</Td>
<td>
The Reduction in Aircraft Quantities Arising from the Equipment Examination is Predicated Upon a more Versatile Design Solution Allowing both Aircraft Variants to be Utilised Across the Range of Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter and Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft Roles and Environments, but with some Minor Trade-Off Against the Achieved Performance. This will Place a Greater Necessity on the Need to Manage the Two Variants Within a Common in-Service Framework with Commonality Within the Defence Lines of Development.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Unit Production Costs (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>
12.7
</Td>
<td>
13.3
</Td>
<td>
45
</Td>
<td>
34
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>
13.7
</Td>
<td>
13.6
</Td>
<td>
35
</Td>
<td>
28
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>increment a – Training Simulators</Td>
<td>
46.8
</Td>
<td>
32.3
</Td>
<td>
2
</Td>
<td>
2
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost – not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to

31 March 2009
</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2010</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>57</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>57</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase (£m)</Td>
<td>322</Td>
<td>133</Td>
<td>455</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure (£m)</Td>
<td>379</Td>
<td>133</Td>
<td>512</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>
June 2006
</Td>
<td>december 2001</Td>
<td>54</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>
June 2006
</Td>
<td>september 2002</Td>
<td>45</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>
May-2013
</Td>
<td>
January-2014
</Td>
<td>
August-2014
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>
May-2014
</Td>
<td>
January-2015
</Td>
<td>
August-2015
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>
In Service Date is Defined as 4 Force Elements at Readiness to Deploy on a Small Scale Focussed Intervention Operation.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>
In Service Date is Defined as One Deployable Aircraft with Logistic Support, Trained Aircrew and Groundcrew in Place.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>august 2014</Td>
<td>january 2014</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>august 2015</Td>
<td>january 2015</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1. Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</Td>
<td>
Since Main Gate, Project Advised that the New Treasury 4 Gate Approval Process for Candidate PFI Projects Needed to be Adopted. This Process Had the Potential to Add One Year to the Procurement Timescale for the Synthetic Training Service. Sufficiently Trained Aircrew are Required Before in Service Date can be Declared and it Was Considered Prudent to Declare an in Service Date Slip of 3 Months While Mitigation Work Matured. (+3) Flight Simulation and Synthetic Trainers Integrated Project Team Lynx Wildcat Training Services Initial
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Gate Business Case Was Approved

By the Investment Approvals Board

In August 2007. the Required

Mitigation Activity Has Been

Completed and Has Brought the

Training Service in Service Date in

Line with the in Service Date and

The Three Months Recovered.(-3)

Historic

-7

Risk Differential

Difference Between the Risk Allowed

For in the Most Likely (50%) Figure

And Highest Acceptable (not to

Exceed) Estimates at Main Gate.

Net Variation

-7

### C.3.3.2. Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft

Date

Variation

Factor

Reason for Variation

Historic

0

Procurement

Strategy

Since Main Gate, Project Advised

That the New Treasury 4 Gate

Approval Process for Candidate PFI

Projects Needed to be Adopted.

This Process Had the Potential to

Add One Year to the Procurement

Timescale for the Synthetic Training

Service. Sufficiently Trained Aircrew

Are Required Before in Service Date

can be Declared and it Was

Considered

Prudent to Declare an in Service

Date Slip of 3

Months While Mitigation Work

Matured. (+3) Flight Simulation and

Synthetic Trainers Integrated

Project Team Future Lynx Training

Services Initial Gate Business

Case Was Approved by the

Investment Approvals Board in

August 2007. the Required

Mitigation Activity Has Been

Completed and Has Brought the

Training Service in Service Date in

Line

With the in Service Date and the

Three Months

Recovered.(-3)

Historic

Risk Differential

-7

Difference Between the Risk Allowed

For in the Most Likely (50%) Figure

And Highest Acceptable (not to

Exceed) Estimates at Main Gate.

Net Variation

-7

### C.3.4. Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – not Applicable

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation – not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>
Sufficient Aircraft and Trained Crews to Generate the Required Number of Sustainable Force Elements at Readiness; the Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter is Compliant with the Endorsed Threshold
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>user Requirement Document and the Legacy Lynx Marks 7 and 9 are No Longer Required to Contribute any Element of Support to the Delivery of Land or Littoral Manoeuvre Capability</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>sufficient, Sustainable Trained Crews and Aircraft to Generate the Required Number of Force Elements at Readiness; the Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft is Compliant with the Endorsed Threshold User Requirement Document and the Legacy Platform is No Longer Required to Contribute any Element of Maritime Capability</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.4.2. Progress Report

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopter</Td>
<td>
FOC Was Undefined at Main Gate. Subsequently Work Has Generated the Current Working Definition. Work Continues to Define the Scope of the Bowman Data Interface Requirement which is to be Delivered at FOC.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lynx Wildcat – Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft</Td>
<td>
FOC Was Undefined at Main Gate. Subsequently Work Has Generated the Endorsed Definition.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract – not Applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Maturity Measures

### D.1.1. Lynx Wildcat

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>maturity Area</Th>
<th>maturity Scale</Th>
<th>last Years Assessment</Th>
<th>current Assessment</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>commercial</Td>
<td Rowspan="3"></Td>
<td Colspan="3" Rowspan="3">
<em>measures under Development</Em>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>financial</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project Management</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Readiness</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The ‘last Years Assessment’ Represent the Assessment at Main Gate, as Reported in MPR2009. No Further Assessments Have Been Made and so the ‘current Years Assessment’ is not Reported.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technology Readiness</Td>
<td>1-9</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The ‘last Years Assessment’ Represent the Assessment at Main Gate, as Reported in MPR2009. No Further Assessments Have Been Made and so the ‘current Years Assessment’ is not Reported.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.1.2. Increment a

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>maturity Area</Th>
<th>maturity Scale</Th>
<th>last Years Assessment</Th>
<th>current Assessment</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>commercial</Td>
<td Rowspan="3"></Td>
<td Colspan="3" Rowspan="3">
<em>measures under Development</Em>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>financial</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project Management</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Readiness</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technology Readiness</Td>
<td>1-9</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">
Not Required for Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
Line of Development
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
Description
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">forecast</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
To be Met
</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>
Not to be Met
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
1. Equipment
</Td>
<td>
Progress as Reported Elsewhere in PSS
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2. Training
</Td>
<td>
Training Technical Proposal Received from Contractor.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
3. Logistics
</Td>
<td>
Support Technical Proposal Received from Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
4. Infrastructure
</Td>
<td>
Assessing Infrastructure Options and Funding
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
5. Personnel
</Td>
<td>
Force Structure Guidance Provided. in Service Teams Developing.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
6. Doctrine
</Td>
<td>
At Mature Draft Stage
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
7. Organisation
</Td>
<td>
Force Structure Guidance Provided. Joint in Nature &amp; Proceeding at Yeovilton.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
8 Information .
</Td>
<td>
Investigating Dependency on Infrastructure Options.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td Colspan="2">100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">in-Year Change</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>
Training Proposal Lacks Pricing Information &amp; Uncertainty from Contractor as to when this will be Available. Risk in Meeting Approvals Timescales Due to Election/Summer Recess.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>
Support Proposal Lacks Pricing Information &amp; Uncertainty from Contractor as to when this will be Available. Risk in Meeting Approvals Timescales Due to Election/Summer Recess.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Wildcat Infrastructure Team Now Formed and Managing Implementation. Funding Issues Remain. Approvals Timelines Coincident with Election and may Lead to Planning Blight.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>
Force Structure Guidance Now Provided and Levels of Manning Identified.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Full Infrastructure Requirement not yet Clear: Awaiting Detailed Proposal for Training and Logistics (Support Solution). Awaiting Clarity on Funding Availability.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Changed Capability Requirements
</Td>
<td>
Manning Process Agreed. Awaiting Personnel Requirement from Organisation and Training Line of Development.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Battlefield Reconnaissance Helicopters

### D.3.1.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Manned Rotorcraft Capable of Independent and Co-Operative, Intelligent Action, which Provides Commanders with a Sustainable, Timely, Responsive and Accurate, Enduring Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability at Long Range Across the Full Spectrum of Conflict.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Capability to Acquire, Designate Targets and Direct the Full Spectrum of Joint Fires via Network Enabled Communications.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level of Operational Effect.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Deliver Operational Capability with a High Likelihood of Survival.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interoperate with Relevant Military and Civil Authorities
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Have a Capability that can Operate Within Defined Natural and Man-Made Environmental Conditions.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate from both Land and Sea Bases to Target Areas on Land or Sea.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Deployed Worldwide
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Key Measure
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
08
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
One of the Five Elements of this KPM (Self-Deploy) Has Been Traded-Out by the Equipment Examination.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>status</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>08</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
There is a Minimal Operational Impact from this KPM Trade, in that Only a Small Number of the Mission Scenarios are Affected. Should Funding be Identified at a Later Date, this Capability Could be Reintroduced to the Design Solution.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2. Surface Combatant Maritime Rotorcraft

### D.3.2.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
KPM
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Manned Rotorcraft Capable of Independent and Co-Operative, Intelligent Action, which Provides Commanders with a Sustainable, Timely, Responsive and Accurate, Enduring Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability at Long Range Across the Full Spectrum of Conflict.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>02</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Requires the Capability to Acquire, Designate Targets and Direct the Full Spectrum of Joint Fires via Network Enabled Communications.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>03</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Autonomously and Cooperatively Attack using Appropriate Rapid and Flexible Fires with the Joint Battlespace.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>04</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Requires a Vertical Lift Capability to Deploy and Support Joint Forces, as Operationally Effective Units, from Land or Sea Bases.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>05</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that is Available for the Required Sustained Level of Operational Effect.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>06</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Deliver Operational Capability with a High Likelihood of Survival.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>07</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Interoperate with Relevant Military and Civilian Authorities
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>08</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall Have a Capability that can Operate Within Defined Natural and Man-Made Environmental Conditions
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>09</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can Operate from both Land and Sea Bases to Target Areas on Land or Sea.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Provided with a Capability that can be Deployed Worldwide
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Measure)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
Equipment Examination Has Put `at Risk` the Surveillance/Reach Element of this KPM.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
10
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>
One of the Five Elements of this KPM (Self-Deploy) Has Been Traded-Out by the Equipment Examination.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
01
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
One of the Ten Elements of this KPM is Considered to be at Risk. the Contracted Position, with Respect to the Installed Radar Detection Performance, Does not Meet the KPM. Work is Ongoing Between the Integrated Project Team and Agusta Westland to Evaluate the Extent of the Shortfall
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3. Operational Impact of Variation

KPM

Date

Status

Operational Impact of Variation

\-

Historic

01

There is a Minimal Operational

Impact from this KPM Trade, in that

Only a Small Number of the Mission

Scenarios are Affected. Should

Funding be Identified at a Later Date,

this Capability Could be Re-

Introduced to the Design Solution.

Historic

10

\-

There is a Minimal Operational

Impact from this KPM Trade, in that

Only a Small Number of the Mission

Scenarios are Affected. Should

Funding be Identified at a Later Date,

this Capability Could be Re-

Introduced to the Design Solution.

01

Historic

\-

There is a Minimal Operational

Impact from this Variation, in that

Only a Small Number of the Mission

Scenarios are Affected. the

Shortfall is Balanced by

Improvements in Other Aspects of

Performance.

Total

-

### D.3.3. Support Contract – not Applicable
