---
year: 2006.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM (FRES)
page_from: 167.0
page_to: 168.0
project_label: Future Rapid Effects System
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2006_167_168.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM (FRES)

Picture not available

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Director Equipment Capability – (Ground Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

The MOD has outlined a two track approach to meeting its armoured fighting vehicle requirement. In the short term it has an urgent need to upgrade the current fleet. In the longer term it needs to equip United Kingdom Armed Forces with a medium weight capability that would be able to project power world-wide rapidly. FRES is the response to this longer term requirement.

FRES will deliver a new, medium weight armoured vehicle fleet with higher levels of deployability and survivability than the current fleet, with the potential to grow its capability as new technology becomes available. The current planning assumption is to deliver 3,775 vehicles. The original requirement was for 1,757 vehicles but this was increased in 2004 under an equipment programme option when the Total Fleet Requirement had been established.

FRES will be part of a balanced force consisting of heavy, medium and light brigades giving the ability to deploy forces rapidly with higher levels of firepower, protection and mobility than Light Forces can achieve, but with deployability and agility that cannot be achieved by Heavy Forces. The current threat on operations, particularly from rocket propelled grenades, heavy machine guns and mines/improvised explosive devices, has reinforced the need for adequately protected armoured vehicles. FRES will replace the Army’s obsolescent Saxon, FV 430 and CVR(T) vehicles.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made ie Main Gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The FRES fleet will encompass 16 battlefield roles that have been grouped together to reflect their technical complexity and priority for entry into service. Each group will have its own Assessment, Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. The initial Assessment Phase (iAP) was approved in April 2004 and will focus primarily on those roles that will make up the Initial Operating Capability (IOC), which is a subset of the full FRES capability. Following a competition, Atkins, an independent Systems

161

House (SH), was appointed as the industrial lead for this phase in November 2004. Led by the FRES

IPT, the SH has been integrated into a team which also includes Defence Science Technology

Laboratories and the Equipment Capability Customer. Under the strategic direction of the MOD, the SH will provide objective analysis of the options for meeting the requirement, manage the programme of technical risk reduction work and bring an industrial perspective to the development of the optimum acquisition strategy for future phases.

The analysis of the options for delivering the FRES capability is one of the key strands of work during the iAP. A number of potential fleet options have been drawn up as part of this analysis, including solutions currently available off the shelf, existing development programmes and new start options. The most significant recent milestone was Fleet Review which was successfully completed in December 2005. This review of the candidate solutions produced decisions that will form the basis of the more detailed planning work that will be carried out during the remainder of the iAP. This work will enable the performance, cost, schedule and risks of these options to be fully understood.

The current assumption is that the iAP (which is due to complete in July 2007) will be followed by a competitive Demonstration Phase for the IOC roles that will assess candidate platforms against the requirement. It is also assumed that there will be separate Main Gate investment decisions for the IOC and Specialist roles. Future Assessment and Demonstration Phases will address the requirements of the later, more technically complex roles.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
649<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
113<a href="fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+536
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Includes the costs of the Assessment Phase for the IOC (Initial Operating Capability) roles and also the Assessment Phase for the Specialist roles.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
<li id="fn2">Specifically only included approval for the initial Assessment Phase for the IOC roles.<a href="fnref2"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
FROM
</th>
<th>
TO
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">FRES will deliver a new, medium weight armoured vehicle fleet with higher levels of deployability and survivability than the current fleet, with the potential to grow its capability as new technology becomes available. Detailed analysis of the candidate solutions and acquisition and support strategies will be carried out during the remainder of the iAP. This work will enable the performance, cost, schedule and risks of these options to be fully understood and will inform the main investment decision</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of future Demonstration and Manufacture phase costs

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
FROM
</th>
<th>
TO
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

162
