---
year: 2007.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: PRECISION GUIDED BOMB (PGB)
page_from: 111.0
page_to: 116.0
project_label: PRECISION GUIDED BOMB (PGB)
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2007_111_116.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

PRECISION GUIDED

BOMB (PGB)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

PRECISION GUIDED BOMB

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Director Equipment Capability (Deep Target Attack)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Capability Manager (Precision Attack)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

An all-weather, 24 hour, general-purpose bombing requirement which offered increased accuracy to reduce collateral damage was identified during the 1991 Gulf War and re-emphasised in subsequent operations. The Precision Guided Bomb (PGB) programme was established to meet this requirement and Raytheon Systems Limited (RSL), who offered the Paveway IV weapon, was selected as the Prime Contractor following international competition. Investment Approvals Board (IAB) approval was given in June 2003 for the procurement of the Weapon System and integration onto Harrier, Tornado and Typhoon aircraft. Contract let was planned for September 2003, however Departmental funding constraints delayed contract let and limited it to placement of the main Weapon, support and Harrier GR9 Integration Contracts. These contracts were let in December 2003. Following the approval of PGB integration onto Typhoon as part of the Future Capability Programme (FCP) in January 2007, the integration funding was transferred from PGB IPT to Typhoon IPT. A further submission will be made once the way forward for Tornado integration becomes clear.

Since contract let LASER capability has been added at no cost to the MoD. All milestones have been achieved; ‘risk reduction’ drops in 2006 were successful, the Weapon System Certificate of Design issued January 2007 and live weapon capability trials started at China Lake.

Work continues across the stakeholder community to deliver capability across all Lines of

Development in order to meet the declared In-Service date (ISD). The PGB Programme is entering its final phase of development and is currently progressing qualification of the Weapon System with the aim of delivering Paveway IV by the ISD.

## 1b. Associated projects

| Critical to Achievement of ISD |              | Critical to Initial Gate Requirement |              |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Project Title                      | Forecast ISD | Project Title                            | Forecast ISD |
| Harrier GR9 Capability C Upgrade   | 2007         | \-                                       | \-           |

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Raytheon Systems Limited (Prime Contractor)</td>
<td>Demonstration to Manufacture</td>
<td>Firm price</td>
<td>International competition</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BAE Systems, Warton</td>
<td>Demonstration to InService</td>
<td>Firm price</td>
<td>Non-competitive</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
277
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
363
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-86
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
-67
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2007</td>
<td>-55</td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</td>
<td>Reduction in forecast as a result of transfer of Typhoon integration funding to Typhoon IPT following Typhoon Future Capability Programme (FCP) Phase 1 Main Gate Business Case Approval.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
December 2006
</td>
<td>-12</td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</td>
<td>Reduction reflects Option E07DT221S – Transfer of PGB Tornado integration ‘cost growth’ element out of PGB line.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Correction of sunk costs reported in MPR06.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-4</td>
<td>Technical Factors</td>
<td>Proactive risk management has given rise to a reduction in the level of risk provision required to deliver the Project. This reduction reflects the revised risk predictions following a comprehensive risk review.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>Departmental Review - Provision for exchange rate fluctuations now</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>Variation (£m)</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>taken at a corporate level.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</td>
<td>The maturity of Data Logging technology precludes use of Data Loggers at this juncture; requirement reassessed and removed (-£1m). Reassessment of the quantity of training rounds required (-£2m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>
Procurement Strategy
</td>
<td>Reduction in forecast as a result of prudent Integrated Test Evaluation and Acceptance (ITEA) management.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+13</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Increase in Tornado integration cost due to DEC Option to delay integration by a further 2 years, then a further 1 year (+£10m,
+£8m). Customer 1 (DEC(DTA)) reduction in Equipment Plan 2005 (-£2m). Reduction in forecast against the Control Total at the start of the Financial Year as a result of RSL risk reduction work (-£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-24</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-86</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2007 (£m)
</th>
<th>
165
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2006/2007
</td>
<td>
2007/2008
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>0.03</td>
<td>0.03</td>
<td>2303</td>
<td>
2303
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
Delivery of 96 weapons, the modification of 12 aircraft of one aircraft type, sufficient trained air and ground crew, all necessary support and a cleared Operational Flight Programme.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
September 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
December 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+3
</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Delay to contract award due to the wider constraints on Defence commitments, in particular restrictions on committing In-Year funds.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-6
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
3
</td>
<td>e. Operational impact of ISD variation</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2"></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>KUR Serial</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Forecast to be Met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>The Over The Target Requirement (OTR) shall be no greater than that which can be achieved using Mk 82 bombs delivered with 15m Circular Error Probable (CEP).</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>The user shall be able to achieve the OTR in allweathers.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>The user shall be able to achieve the OTR 24hours a day.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>The user shall be able to programme the weapon with new target co-ordinates in the air prior to release.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>The user shall be able to deliver PGBs from Tornado GR4/4A, Harrier GR9/9A and Typhoon.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>The user shall be able to achieve the effect at the target without causing greater damage to collateral objects than would be created by a Mk 82 bomb delivered within a CEP of 15m.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>The user shall be able to employ the weapon from Harrier GR9/9A on embarked operations from an Invisible Class Aircraft Carrier (CVS).</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>The weapon shall have a 75% probability of successfully completing a mission at any stage during its life.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td colspan="2">100 %</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

| Date | Key Requirement | Factor | Explanation |
|----------|---------------------|------------|-----------------|
| -    | -               | -      | -           |

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The purpose of the Assessment Phase was to select the preferred bidder to take forward to Main Gate. Invitations to Tender were released to six companies in October 2001 and six formal tenders were received. A two-stage Assessment Phase resulted in MBDA and Raytheon Systems Limited being taken forward into the final phase of the competition. A Combined Operational Effectiveness and Investment Appraisal (COEIA) was undertaken by Dstl and a technical and commercial assessment of the tenders was undertaken by the PGB IPT and its specialist stakeholders (including QinetiQ and BAE Systems).

The Main Gate Business Case was approved in June 2003. Raytheon Systems Limited, who offered the Paveway IV weapon to meet the PGB requirement, was selected as the preferred contractor.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase cost
</th>
<th>Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Actual Cost</td>
<td>
5
</td>
<td>
1.8%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
3
</td>
<td>
1.1%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+2
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
June 2003
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 2001
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
23
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>
318
</td>
<td>
339
</td>
<td>
363
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
218
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
230
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
September 2006
</td>
<td>June 2007</td>
<td>
December 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>June 2006</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2007
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
