---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Typhoon
Page_from: 180.0
Page_to: 204.0
Project_label: Typhoon
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_180_204.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 53%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon Project Team
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore Mark Hopkins (Air Capability)
</Td>
<td>25 April 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Typhoon Typhoon Future Capability Programme Active Electronic Scanned Array
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Typhoon

Typhoon, Formerly Known as Eurofighter, is an Agile Multi-Role Combat Aircraft. Originally Designed Primarily, but not Exclusively, for Air Superiority, the Aircraft is also Capable of Delivering a Precision Ground Attack Capability. Typhoon Has the Flexibility to Respond to the Uncertain Demands of the Current and Evolving Strategic Environment.

The Aircraft is Being Developed, Produced and Supported in a Collaborative Project with Germany, Italy and Spain. the Project is Managed on Behalf of the Four Partner Nations by the NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency. to Date, Contracts Have Been Placed for the RAF to Receive 160 Aircraft in Three Tranches. Typhoon Support is Being Delivered Through the Letting of Long-Term Contracts Against Five Areas of Support.

Typhoon Future Capability Programme

The Typhoon Future Capability Programme will Provide Enhancements to the Typhoon Aircraft, both in the Air-to-Air and Air-to-Surface Roles, to Sustain the RAF’s Typhoon Fleet’s Multi-Role Capabilities.

The First Phase of the Future Capability Programme, under a Contract Signed in March 2007, will Integrate Paveway IV and the Litening III Laser Designator Pod Onto Tranche 2 Aircraft from 2012 Onwards as Well as Interoperability Upgrades without which Those Aircraft will be Neither Compliant with New Civil Airspace Regulations nor Interoperable with Key Coalition Allies. It will also Provide the Human Machine Interface for Multi-Role Operations, Allowing Typhoon to Fulfil Air-to-Air and Air-to-Surface Operations with the Current, Planned and Projected Weapons.

The Department will Continue to Develop the Typhoon Capability Incrementally in Line with the Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Typhoon

Pre-Development, which Commenced with the Approval of the Feasibility Study in 1984, Comprised a Number of Activities. Following Early Concept Studies, and Various Efforts at Establishing a Collaborative Programme, There Were Two Key Typhoon Demonstration Activities Completed by the UK Before Development: The Experimental Aircraft Programme, an Airframe Programme Primarily Aimed at Proving the Feasibility of the Typhoon Unstable Flight Control Concepts, and the XG40 Engine Demonstrator Programme at Rolls Royce. the Results of These Demonstrators and their Associated Studies, Together with the Results of Similar Work Within the Other Nations Were Harmonised in a Definition, Refinement and Risk Reduction Phase that Ran from the End of 1985 when Four Nations Signed the Initial Memorandum of Understanding, until 1988 when the Development Contract Was Signed.

Typhoon Future Capability Programme - Phase 1

The Approval Process for Typhoon Tranche 2 Noted the Intention to Develop the Capability of the Aircraft Through Life and Envisaged an Incremental Route to the Acquisition of Future Capability Enhancements. the Assessment Phase Found Technology and Integration Were not a Major Challenge and that Risks Mostly Pertained to the Commercial and Industrial Aspects of the Programme. These Have Been Addressed and the MOD Approvals Process for the Project Was Accelerated to Combine Initial Gate, Including the Cost Already Incurred During the Assessment Phase, and Main Gate in Order to Maximise Efficiency Across the Four Partner Nations.

## A.3. Project History

Typhoon Has Been in Service with the RAF Since 2003 and Commenced Operational Duties for the First Time in June 2007 when it Assumed Quick Reaction Alert Responsibility for Defence of UK Airspace. Deployable Air Defence Operational Status Was Achieved on 1 January 2008, which Enables Typhoon to Deploy Worldwide on Air-to-Air Missions. Typhoon Was Declared to NATO in the Deployable Air Defence –
Advanced Role on 1 April 2008. Typhoon Assumed Quick Reaction Alert Responsibility for Defence of South Atlantic Islands Airspace in September 2009, Taking over from Tornado F3.

The Existing Advanced Air-to-Air Missile Capability on Tranche 1 Aircraft Has Been Complemented by the Integration of an Initial Precision Air-to-Surface Capability, which Was Declared Combat Ready by the RAF in July 2008. This Air-to-Surface Capability Enabled Declaration of Multi-Role Status and is in Advance of more Comprehensive Air-to-Surface Capability Through the Typhoon Future Capability Programme for Tranche 2 Aircraft.

Deliveries of Tranche 2 Aircraft Commenced in October 2008. the Original Typhoon Fleet Numbers Required (232 Aircraft) Were Established in the 1990s. Current Fleet Planning and Assumptions to Meet Defence Requirements Have Determined the Aircraft Numbers and Capabilities Required Now (160 Aircraft). the Contract for the Third Tranche, Signed in July 2009, Represents the Best Solution for the UK in Balancing Current Military Requirement and International Obligations Against Affordability. the UK Has Retained the Option to Order Further Aircraft. Deliveries of Tranche 3 Aircraft are Scheduled to Start in 2013.

The Typhoon Availability Service Contract with BAE Systems, Signed in March 2009 Formally Commenced in September 2009. the Engine Availability Service Contract with Rolls-Royce Was Signed in December 2009. These Contracts are Part of the Strategy to Transform Support Arrangements Through Partnering with UK Industry.

Number 6 Squadron, the First Typhoon Fighter Squadron in Scotland, Officially Formed at RAF Leuchars on 6 September 2010. the Typhoon Force Assumed Quick Reaction Alert (North) Air Defence Responsibility from RAF Leuchars in March 2011.

The Outcome of the Review into Basing Was Announced by the Secretary of State for Defence in July 2011 which will Result in the Closure of Leuchars as an Air Force Base and Move the Typhoon Squadron to RAF Lossiemouth, Redeploying Aircraft from 2013 Onwards.

A Proposal Was Made in May 2010 by the Eurofighter GmbH Consortium to Slow Down Rate of Production of Typhoon Tranche 3a Aircraft for all Four Partner Nations. the Typhoon Partner Nations Agreed to this Proposal in July 2011. the Agreement on Production Slowdown Aims to Protect the Industrial Capacity of the Eurofighter Partner Companies to Service Export Orders for Typhoon While Meeting the Requirements of the Partner Nations. in March 2011, Typhoon Aircraft Were Deployed Overseas for the First Time on Contingent Operations in Support of the Coalition Plan to Enforce United Nations Resolution 1973 (Libya).

Following Typhoon’s First Overseas Contingent Operational Deployment in March 2011 on Operation ELLAMY, it Was Used Initially in an Air Defence Role and then as a Ground Attack Aircraft Against Targets Varying from Tactical to Strategic. the Aircraft Consistently Demonstrated Exceptional Levels of Reliability, Performance, Accuracy and Overall Cost-Effectiveness over and above the MOD’s Very High Expectations. Typhoon Aircraft Deployed on Operation ELLAMY Returned to the UK in September 2011. in June 2011 the Ministers of the Four Core Partner Nations Signed an Agreement which Signalled their Intent to Develop an Operational Requirement for an Electronically Scanned Radar for the Eurofighter Programme which Would Aim to Introduce a Harmonized New Radar Onto the Aircraft, also Enhancing the Exportability of the Aircraft to New Overseas Customers.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Typhoon Capability Upgrades Continue to be Progressed and Capitalise on the Aircrafts Growth Potential During the Early Stages of Its Operational Life as a Multi-Role Air Defence Platform in the 21st Century. Planned Upgrades Include; the Integration of the Meteor Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile Following Its Successful Launch from a Typhoon Aircraft in 2012; Continuing Work to Mature the Technology Required to Replace the Existing Mechanically Scanned Radar with a New Electronically Scanned Radar.

An Announcement Was Made December 2012 for the Contract Between BAES and the Sultanate of Oman for the Delivery of 12 Typhoon Aircraft to the Royal Omani Air Force. This will Increase the Number of Typhoon Users to Seven.

Under the Programme Known as Retrofit 2, 43 Typhoon Aircraft Have Been Upgraded to the Tranche 1 Block 5 Standard, which Includes Installation of the Forward Looking Infra-Red System, Sensor Fusion and the Enhancement of Air-to-Air Capability.

Typhoon Undertook it First ‘major’ Maintenance Interval after Completing 1,600 Flying Hours. the ‘major’ Maintenance Programme Typically Takes Around Nine Months per Aircraft to Complete and is Carried Out as Part of the Typhoon Availability Service at RAF Coningsby.

Typhoon Played a Key Role During the 2012 Olympics by Providing Air Defence Capability when They Were Deployed to RAF Northolt to Protect London as Part of Operation Olympic Guardian. the Aircraft also Took Part in Fly Pasts over London During the Diamond Jubilee Celebrations.

The First Phase of the Future Capability Programme Has Shown Good Progress over the Last Year Now that the Project Schedule Has Been Re-Baselined, Through Joint Working Between the Department and Industry. This Accommodated the 18 Month Delay which Was Highlighted in Major Projects Report 2012.

The Typhoon Front Line Fleet Continues to Build with Well over Half of the Contracted Deliveries of 160 Aircraft in Three Tranches Now in Service with the RAF.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Typhoon is Intended to be a Cornerstone of UK Air Defence and the Aircraft will be Pivotal to the Delivery of Standing Home Commitments. Having Replaced Jaguar in the Ground Attack Role and with Future Reductions in Other Aircraft Types Occurring, Loss of Typhoon Would Reduce the UK's Ground-Attack and Air Superiority Capabilities.

## A.6. Associated Projects

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>eurojet Turbo GmbH Engine Consortium

Comprising: Avio

(Formerly FIAT

Avio), ITP, MTU,

Rolls Royce</Td>
<td>development</Td>
<td>
Firm Price (Avio, ITP, MTU) Fixed

Price (Rolls Royce) for Propulsion Systems</Td>
<td>non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value

Of which Amounts to

some 10% of Overall Value of the Prime Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>typhoon</Th>
<th>
Eurofighter GmbH

Airframe Consortium Comprising: Alenia, BAE Systems,

Cassidian (Formerly EADS(CASA) and EADS(Deutschland

)</Th>
<th>development</Th>
<th>fixed Price for Airframe and Equipments and Target Cost Incentive

Arrangement for

Aircraft Equipment Integration. Following a Breach of the Limit of Contractor Liability Provisions the Price Elements for Airframe and Equipments Have

Been Converted to a Limit of Liability Cost

Reimbursement without Profit.</Th>
<th>non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value of which Amounts to some 30% of the Overall Value of the Prime Contract.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
Eurofighter GmbH

Airframe Consortium (See Details under Development above).</Td>
<td>production Investment/Product Ion</Td>
<td>
Overall Maximum

Prices for Production Investment and Production of Airframes for all 232 UK Aircraft. (Fixed Price for Production of 1st and 2nd Tranche Airframe). Fixed Prices for all Production, Investment and Production of

Aircraft Equipment.
</Td>
<td>non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value of which Amounts to some 10% of the Overall Value of the Prime Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>eurojet Turbo GmbH Engine Consortium (See Details under Development above).</Td>
<td>production Investment/Product Ion</Td>
<td>
Overall Maximum

Prices for Production Investment and Production of

Engines for all 232 UK Aircraft. Firm

Price (Avio, ITP, MTU) Fixed Price (Rolls Royce) for Tranche 1, Tranche 2 and

Tranche 3 Engine

Production Investment and Production.</Td>
<td>non-Competitive but with International Subcontract Competitive Elements, the Value of which Amounts to some 10% of the Overall Value of the Prime Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>
Eurofighter GmbH

Airframe Consortium Comprising: Alenia, BAE Systems,

Cassidian (Formerly EADS(CASA) and EADS(Deutschland

)</Td>
<td>design, Development, Demonstration, Qualification and Production Clearance of the First Batch of Enhancements.</Td>
<td>overall Max Price to be Converted to UK Firm Price</Td>
<td>
Collaborative. Noncompetitive but with International

Competitive Subcontract Elements.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 0%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="7">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="5">
Typhoon's Partnered Support Strategy Was Originally Approved in 2000. Its Principles Were Reinforced by the Results of a 2004 Support Review. the Partnered Support Strategy - Referred to as Typhoon Future Support - will be Delivered Through the Letting of Long-Term Contracts Against Five Areas of Support: For the Typhoon Availability Service on BAE Systems; for the Propulsion Availability Service on Rolls Royce; for Avionics (Spares Provisioning and Component Repair) via the NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency; and for International Technical Support Services, also via the NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency. Valuable Experience Has Already Been Gained Through the Letting of Incremental Contracts to Transform Typhoon Support, the First of which Was the Initial Phase of the Engine Availability Contract with Rolls Royce in 2005. Work is Now Well Underway to Implement Changes to the Contractual Framework for Support by Replacing Eleven Legacy Contracts with Four New more Efficient Contracts as a Part of a Wider Transformation Programme Jointly Introduced by Partner Nations and Eurofighter Gmbh. Two of the Four Contracts Were Let in 2012 and Work is Now Underway to Let the Remaining Two. the UK Has also Developed a Series of Managed Workstreams, Focussing on the Support Costs of the Engine, Avionics Engineering Sustainment and Improved Maintenance Processes. Progress Against These Workstreams Has Continued During the Year with Efficiencies Now Starting to be Realised in Maintenance of the Aircraft. All of These Workstreams are Specifically Designed to Manage Support Expenditure so that it Stays Within the Current Approval Limit over the Life of the Aircraft to Its Planned Out of Service Date.
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Support Title
</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Typhoon Availability Service
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems
</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>target Cost Plus Incentive Fee</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Non-Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Engine Availability Service
</Td>
<td>
Rolls Royce
</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>target Cost Plus Incentive Fee</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Non-Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Spares Provisioning
</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH and Eurojet GmbH</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>
Fixed Price
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
International Noncompetitive Based on Commitments under Memoranda of Understanding, with International Workshare of Subcontracting also Determined by Those Memoranda
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>component Repair</Th>
<th>eurofighter GmbH and Eurojet GmbH</Th>
<th>
Support
</Th>
<th>
Fixed Price
</Th>
<th>international Noncompetitive Based on Commitments under Memoranda of Understanding, with International Workshare of Subcontracting also Determined by Those Memoranda</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>technical Support Services</Td>
<td>eurofighter GmbH and Eurojet GmbH</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>
Fixed Price
</Td>
<td>international Noncompetitive Based on Commitments under Memoranda of Understanding, with International Workshare of Subcontracting also Determined by Those Memoranda</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>87</Td>
<td>78</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
<td>0%</Td>
<td>0%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>39</Td>
<td>39</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>9%</Td>
<td>9%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>active Electronic Scanned Array</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
15173
</Td>
<td>
15348
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>
355
</Td>
<td>
402
</Td>
<td>
420
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>active Electronic Scanned Array</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>15173</Td>
<td>17652</Td>
<td>+2479</Td>
<td>-19</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>402</Td>
<td>430</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>15575</Td>
<td>18082</Td>
<td>+2507</Td>
<td>-30</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Typhoon

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2013
</Td>
<td>
+11
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>cost Increases Across the Main Development Contract. NAO Were Unable to Validate this Due to Insufficient Evidence Being Provided.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
February 2013
</Td>
<td>
-18
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>risk Retirement. Due to the Maturity of the Programme Risk Was Released in Planning Round 13, FY 12/13 (£12m), FY 13/14 (£6m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
August 2012
</Th>
<th>+1</Th>
<th>
Change in Associated Project
</Th>
<th>fy 13/14 £1m - Due to the Delay in Voyager Refuel Clearance Safety Certification (QRPC1/ABC13).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>april 2012</Td>
<td>-13</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>tranche 3 Adjustment FY 19/20 Due to De-Scoping of Electronic Planning Tool in Planning Round 12.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in in Year Costs of Tranche 3 Production</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+31</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>increased Profile as a Result of Tranche 3 Production Stretch Planning Round 12 Option Taken.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-96</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in Tranche 3 Profile from Planning Round 11 to Planning Round 12 Due to Reassessment of Project Costs and Risks and Reduction in Software Costs.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Indirect RDEL (Foreign Exchange) in Accordance with a Change in Departmental Policy.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+86</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>changes to Planning Round 2011 Assumptions for Exchange Rates.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-55</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reassessment of Development Costs (-£29m) and Production Costs (-£14m). Reduction in Development Costs as a Result of in Year Savings (-£12m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+87</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury (+87m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+71</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>changes to Planning Round Assumptions for Foreign Exchange Rates</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-74</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reassessment of Development Cost (-£70m). Reassessment of Production Cost (-4m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2531</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>inclusion of Tranche 3 Aircraft Contract (+£2531m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+58</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>changes to Planning Round Assumptions for Exchange Rates and Weakening of the Pound Against the Euro and US Dollar During 2008/09</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-47</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>reassessment of Development Cost (-£83m). Reassessment of Production Cost (+£36m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-38</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>saving Measures Taken in Planning Round 2009 (-£38m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-128</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>reduced Provision for Modifications (-£123m). Reduced Quantity of Role Equipment (-£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+118</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>development Revised Cost (+£55m) as a Result of Revised Assessment of Change Proposals and Risk. Tranche 1 Production Revised Cost (+£50m) as a Result of Refined Assessment of Retrofit Programme and Interoperability Modifications. Tranche 2 Production Revised Cost (-£5m) as a Result of Revised Assessment of Change Proposals. Revised Assessment of UK Contribution to Eurofighter, EuroJet and NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency Admin Costs (+£18m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+53</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>more Accurate Calculation of Inflation Based on Advice from NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency (+£53m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-18</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>revised Euro Rate Advised for Planning Round 2008 (-£18m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-482</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>transfer to Future Capability Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+65</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>correction of Omission of Transferred Cost in MPR05 Calculation.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>industry Restructuring.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-36</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>re-Assessment of Tranche 2 Estimated Cost (-
£418m),revised Assessment of Tranche 2 Aircraft Production Contract (+£385m), Revised Assessment for Cost of Tranche 2 Engine Production Contract (£45m), Revised Provision for Future Changes to Production Standards(-£35m), Revised Estimate for Retrofitting Early Tranche 1 Aircraft to Final Production Standard (+£37m), Revised Estimate for the Precision Air to Ground Capability (+£42m),reduction in Value of Role Equipment Required for Multi Role Squadrons (-£17m), Revised Assessment of Cost of NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency and Industry Management Fees (+£25m), Reduction in Forecast for Cost of Release to Service Support (-£10m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1355</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>removal of Provision for New Weapons and Tranche 1 to Tranche 2 Retrofit to Create Separate Typhoon Future Capability Project ; Subject to Approval by Investment Approvals Board (-£377m). Separation of Tranche 3 (£978m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+945</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>higher than Expected Development Costs, Notably for Equipments (+£316m). Obsolescence Costs Resulting from Rapid Changes in Computer Hardware Technology (+£33m). Increases in the Estimated Cost of Enhancing the Weapons System Operational Capabilities (+£140m). Further Price Variation Due to Slippage in the Programme (+£136m). Reassessment of the Cost of Developing Aircraft Enhanced Operational Capability and the Production of Tranches 2 &amp; 3 Aircraft (Most Notably the Reduced Scope for Savings Due to Learning Curve Efficiency Gains) (+£320m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+290</Th>
<th>changed Capability Requirements</Th>
<th>provision for Integration of New Weapons and Sensors not Contained Within Original Approval (Includes Conventionally Armed Stand-Off Missile, Advanced Anti-Armour Weapon, Low-Level Laser Guided Bomb, Thermal Imaging Airborne Laser Designator) (+£239m) &amp; the Retrofit of Tranche 1 Aircraft to Tranche 2 Standard (+£117m).deletion of Requirements for Gun (-£32m), 1500l Fuel Tank (-£16m), CRV7 Rocket (-£2m) &amp; Air Launched Anti Radiation Missile (-£21m). Conventionally Armed Stand-Off Missile Integration Assets (+£5m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-8</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>transfers to Other Budgets (£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-12</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>changes in Inflation Assumptions Since Approval: Development (+£208m) and Production (£220m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-114</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>changes in Exchange Rate Assumptions Since Approval (£114m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-52</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>reprofiling and Adjustment of Anticipated Tranches 2 and 3 Airframe, Equipment and Engine Prices (+£103m). Introduction of Benefits to be Assumed from Planned Implementation of SMART Procurement Processes (-£165m). Reassessment of the Cost and Timing of Integrating New Weapons (+£5m). Increased Estimates for QinetiQ/Dstl Test Facilities in Support of the Development Trials Programme (+£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+413
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>german Withdrawal from Certain Equipments (+£106m). Reorientation Development Assurance Programme to Bridge Gap Between Development and Production Investment (+£28m);
Extension of Integrated Logistic Support Programme (+£45m); Eurofighter/Eurojet GmbH Management Costs (+£30m); Contract Price Increases (+£87m); Risk Provision (+£117m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+259
</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>changes in Accounting Rules (Inclusion of Intramural Costs) (+£275m ); Transfer Costs of Industrial Consortia Management Activities from Production Phase to Support Phase (-£218m); Derivation of Approved Cost on a Resource Basis (+£202m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
+2479
</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.2 Typhoon Future Capability Programme

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>risk Retirement. Due to the Maturity of the Programme Risk Was Released in Planning Round 13, FY 13/14 (£2m) &amp; FY 14/15 (£2m). in Year FY 12/13 (£7m) NAO Were Unable to Validate this Due to Insufficient Evidence Being Provided.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+22</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>higher than Expected Development Costs Due to Complexity of Requirement Specification.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Indirect RDEL (Foreign Exchange) in Accordance with a Change in Departmental Policy.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>changes to Planning Round Assumptions for Exchange Rates.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-8</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in Costs Due to Reassessment of Risk.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>changes to Planning Round Assumptions for Foreign Exchange Rates.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+7</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>changes to Planning Round Assumptions for Exchange Rates and Weakening of the Pound Against the Euro and US Dollar During 2008/09</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in CDEL Achieved at Contract Negotiation (-£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>in 2007/8 an Attempt to Rebaseline the Future Capability Programme Approval (for Predominantly Technical Reasons) Was Rejected. This Change Was not Reflected in Subsequent Major Projects Report Submissions and Resulted in a Higher Approval Baseline Being Carried Forward.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 66%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>does not Directly Impact Operations</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>no Impact on Operations</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>13100</Td>
<td>13100</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
13100
</Td>
<td>
13100
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

## B.4.2 Operational Impact on Support / PFI Cost

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>120</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>120</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>15149</Td>
<td>805</Td>
<td>15954</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>3781</Td>
<td>558</Td>
<td>4339</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>19050</Td>
<td>1363</Td>
<td>20413</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>(Legacy Project) Pre SMART</Td>
<td>
November 1987
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>combined Initial and Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>january 2007</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>active Electronic Scanned Array</Td>
<td>july 2011</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
December 1998
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>
January 2012
</Td>
<td>
June 2012
</Td>
<td>
June 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>active Electronic Scanned Array</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>in-Service Date - Date of Delivery of First Aircraft to the RAF. Initial Operating Capability - When Squadron Pilots Begin Training They Start to Contribute to Defence Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>in-Service Date - Delivery to the RAF of Autonomous Precision Air-to-Surface Military Capability in 12 Tranche 2 Aircraft. Initial Operating Capability - The Same as in-Service Date.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>
December 1998
</Td>
<td>june 2003</Td>
<td>54</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>june 2012</Td>
<td>
December 2013
</Td>
<td>18</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Typhoon

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+32
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>resulting from the Application of Complex Technologies Required to Enable the Equipment to Meet the Original Staff Requirement (+32 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+22
</Td>
<td>
Procurement

Processes - International

Collaboration
</Td>
<td>reorientation of the Development Phase in Response to the Changed Strategic Environment and Budgetary Pressures of the Four Nations and Delays in Signature of the Memoranda of Understanding for the Production and Support Phases (+22 Months).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+54
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.2 Typhoon Future Capability Programme

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+15
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>rebaseline of Programme by Industry for Integrated Logistic Support and Embodiment Factors</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+3
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>re-Baselining of Future Capability Programme which Affects Forecast of ISD.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+18
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>support Costs of Current Equipment</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1075</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Cost of Running on

Tornado and Jaguar</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>other</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-861</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>estimated Support Costs for Typhoon not Incurred</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>+214</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>key Improvements in Capability not Realised until Revised ISD Are: i) Agility and all Altitude Performance;
<ol Start="2" Type="i">
<li>autonomous Detection, Identification and Multiple Engagement of Air to Air Targets;</Li>
<li>human Computer Interface to Reduce Operator Workload;iv) Multi Role Capability;</Li>
</Ol>
v) Survivability Through Superior Airframe and Equipment Performance;
Vi) Low Mean Time Between Failures. the 54 Month Delay Has Been Mitigated to a Small Extent by Compressing the Entry into Service Period, but the Net Effect is a Delay of Four Years.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>delays to Future Capability Programme 1 Does not Adversley Impact on the Typhoon Force Build.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon</Td>
<td>a Declaration by Head of Capability (Theatre Airspace) that the Full Strength Military Capability Has Been Achieved.</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme</Td>
<td>a Declaration by Head of Capability (Theatre Airspace) that Swing-Role Military Capability Has Been Achieved.</Td>
<td>on Track</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract

## C.5.1 Scope of Support / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>scope</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Availability Service</Td>
<td>aircraft Platform Availability Service Integrating on-Shore Support Activities with the Outputs of Mandated International Contracts</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>engine Availability Service</Td>
<td>national Engine Spares Inclusive Availability Contract with International Support Contracts</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spares Provisioning</Td>
<td>international Spares Provisioning Contract under the Terms Established in Memoranda of Understanding.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>component Repair</Td>
<td>international Component Repair Contract under the Terms Established in Memoranda of Understanding.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>technical Support Service</Td>
<td>international Contract for the Provision of Technical Support Services and Advice under the Terms Established in Memoranda of Understanding.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
93%
</Td>
<td>
85 Green
</Td>
<td>typhoon</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
97%
</Td>
<td>
51 Red
</Td>
<td>future Capability Programme - Project Has Been Rebaselined and is Now Progressing Well.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Delivery of Typhoon Platform, Typhoon

Future Capability Programme and Associated Weapons.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>the Timely Provision of Suitably Qualified and Experienced Personnel to Deliver

Defence Outputs, Now and in the Future.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>the Provision of Maintenance and Support to the Typhoon Fleet, Including the Operation of Support Activities Such as Supply Chain.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>the Acquisition, Development, Management and Disposal of all Fixed, Permanent Buildings and Structures, Land, Utilities and Facility Management Services in Support of the Typhoon Capability.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>the Timely Provision of Sufficient, Capable and Motivated Personnel to Deliver the Typhoon Capability, Now and in the Future.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>doctrine is an Expression of the Principles by which Military Forces Guide the Use of Typhoon.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>relates to the Operational and Nonoperational Organisational Relationships of People. It Typically Includes Military Force Structures, MOD Civilian Organisational Structures and Defence Contractors Providing Support.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>the Timely Provision of Sufficient, Capable IT and Information Systems to Deliver Typhoon Capability. It Includes the Production and Validation of all Mission Support Data for Operations, Trials and Training.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>5 (3)</Td>
<td>3</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>defence Line of Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>generation and Validation of Mission Data for Elements of the Weapon System is Heavily Reliant on Technical Support. with Mission Data Production Reliant on Interim Industry Equipment, and Personnel Additional Future Investment will be Required.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>national Support Arrangements are Working Well, but There are Problems with the Timely Supply of Spares and Repair of Equipment under the Collaborative Support Contracts which are Contributing to the RAF Failing to Achieve Its Flying Hours.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>there is Risk that Synthetic Training will not be Provided Concurrently with the Future Capability Programme 1 Aircraft Standard, Across the Typhoon Force.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>it is Now Assessed that this DLOD will Deliver Capability to Meet the Redefined Future Capability Programme 1 in Service Date of December 2013.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Approved ISD of June 2012 for Future Capability Programme 1 will not be Achieved and is Likely to be Delayed by over 12 Months. a Combination of Technical Complexity, Partner Nation Disagreement on a Synthetic Training Solution and Delays in Agreement of an International Support Arrangement Have Caused the Delay. the Situation is Summarised in an Information Note Released on 2nd April 2012. the ISD for Typhoon Surface-Attack Capability Was Rebaselined as Part of the Strategic Defence and Security Review to 2015. Consequently, the Delay to the Delivery of Future Capability Programme 1 DLODs Does not Affect Typhoon's Ability to Deliver Defence Final Output.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>logistics</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>the Delivery of the Future Capability Programme 1 Logistics DLOD is Dependent on the Completion of the Future Capability Programme Product which is Delayed by over 12 Months (Information Note Released on 2nd April 2012 Refers). the ISD for Typhoon Surface-Attack Capability Was Rebaselined as Part of the Strategic Defence and Security Review to 2015. Consequently, the Delay to the Delivery of Future Capability Programme 1 DLODs Does not Affect Typhoon's Ability to Deliver Defence Final Output.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Delivery of the Future Capability Programme 1 Training DLOD is Dependent on the Completion of the Future Capability Programme Product which is Delayed by over 12 Months (Information Note Released on 2nd April 2012 Refers). the ISD for Typhoon Surface-Attack Capability Was Rebaselined as Part of the Strategic Defence and Security Review to 2015. Consequently, the Delay to the Delivery of Future Capability Programme 1 DLODs Does not Affect Typhoon's Ability to Deliver Defence Final Output.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>overall Performance is Good with Minor Issues Mainly Relating to the Second Operating Base at Leuchars. Minimum Infrastructure Was Provided Because the Timescale for Delivery Was Short (Approximately Two Years) and some Mitigations are Still in Place. Furthermore, Funding for the Building for Synthetic Simulators Has Still not Been Approved.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>national Support Arrangements are Working Well, but There are Problems with the Timely Supply of Spares and Repair of Equipment under the Collaborative Support Contracts which are Contributing to the RAF Failing to Achieve Its Flying Hours.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>generation and Validation of Mission Data for Elements of the Weapon System Continues to Lag Aircraft Development. with Mission Data Production Reliant on Interim Industry Equipment, Additional Future Investment will be Required.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>training</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors and Technical Factors</Th>
<th>a Planning Round 2009 Measure Restricted the Annual Flying Task Resource Available to Support Flying Training for Front Line Pilots, Capping the Deliverable Capability; Pilots are Now Resourced to Ensure Minimum Safe Sustainable Flying Rate. Eurofighter Aircrew Synthetic Training Aids also Failed to Deliver Software Upgrades to Programme Timescales; Synthetic Multi-Role Training Capability Has Been Delayed as a Result.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>redefinition</Td>
<td>the Equipment DLOD is not Now Considered "At Risk" as the Previous Assessment Was Based on an in-Year Perspective, Rather than a Forecast of Progress Towards Achieving Full Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>redefinition</Td>
<td>the Logistics DLOD is not Now Considered "At Risk" as the Previous Assessment Was Based on an in-Year Perspective, Rather than a Forecast of Progress Towards Achieving Full Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>generation of Sufficient Technical Manpower to Fulfil the Combined Requirements of the Typhoon Availability Service and Those Necessary to Man the Front Line Could not be Met, Largely Due to a Global Shortfall of Aircraft Engineering Technicians.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>there are Currently Insufficient Resources Available at the Right Time to Integrate Weapons Systems, Such as BVRAAM, Onto the Typhoon Platform.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Requirement to Provide Additional Training as a Result of Exports Has Adversely Affected the UK’s Typhoon Training Capacity.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Requirement to Provide Additional Spares Provisioning as a Result of Exports Has Adversely Affected the UK’s Ability to Deliver Full Logistics Support.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Equipment Required to Generate, Verify and Validate Mission Dependent Data for Elements of the Weapons System Lags Aircraft Development by Up to 2 Years and is Currently not Fit for Purpose. Therefore, Mission Dependent Data Production is Reliant on Interim Industry Equipment which Does not Permit Validation or Verification Testing of this Data to MOD Quality Assurance Standards until January 2010 at the Earliest. Mitigations are in Place to Manage this Risk Against Typhoon’s Tasks over the Next 3 Years, but this Area will Require Further Investment as Typhoon’s Tasks Grow in Accordance with Extant Planning Assumptions.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Typhoon

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>take Off Distance</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>landing Distance</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>equipment, Training, Logistics, Personnel</Td>
<td>attributable Failures per 1000 Flying Hours</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>equipment, Logistics</Td>
<td>life (Flying Hours)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>sustained Minimum Turn Radii at Sea Level, Max Reheat</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>maximum Speed at Sea Level</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>maximum Speed at 36,000 Ft</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>acceleration Time at Sea Level from 200 Knots to Mach 0.9</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>instantaneous Turn Rate Sea Level, Max Reheat</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>sustained Turn Rate at Mach 0.9 at 5000ft, Max Dry</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
9 (1)
</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
9 (1)
</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 07</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>industry Flight Trials to Extend the Aircraft Performance Envelope Have Identified Acoustic Vibration Within the Engine Intake which is Causing the Intake to Resonate at Very High Speeds. This Has Potential Long Term Fatigue Implications. It is Assessed that it Would not be Cost Effective to Conduct Trials to Expand the Existing Clearance.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 02</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>refined Modelling Carried Out to Support the 1994 Reorientation Submission Indicated that in the Most Adverse Conditions the Specified Landing Distance Would not be Achieved - this Was Accepted by the Equipment Approvals Committee.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.3.2 Typhoon Future Capability Programme

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>to Engage a Defined Set of Targets.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>to Complete Air Policing Duties.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>to Maintain Typhoon Rates of Effort.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>to Satisfy Communications and Information Systems Interoperability Requirements.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
5
</Td>
<td>
All
</Td>
<td>to Complete a Mission in Zero Visibility.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
6
</Td>
<td>
All
</Td>
<td>to Complete the Mission from Zero to Bright Sunlight.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
7
</Td>
<td>
All
</Td>
<td>to Maintain the Typhoon Supportability.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
7 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
7 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

### D.3.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation

## D.4. Support Contract

## D.4.1 Typhoon

### D.4.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>forward Available Fleet: Measured as a Percentage of the Average Number of Available Forward Available Fleet Aircraft Against the Planned Number of Forward Available Fleet Aircraft for the Accounting Period.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>operational Aircraft: Measured as the Number of Operational Aircraft Within the Appropriate Readiness Timescale.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>pilots: Measured as the Percentage of Productive Pilots Available for Tasking Against the Planned Number of Pilots for the Accounting Period.</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
3 (2)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
3 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>there is a Risk that the Tranche 2 Aircraft will not be Available to Declare as Operational Force Elements as a Result of Technical and Support Issues. Several Avionic Upgrades and a Full Deployable Support Solution Must be in Place for Tranche 2 Aircraft to be Declared as Operational</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>there is a Risk that the Synthetic Training Devices (Simulators) will not be Upgraded Concurrently with the Aircraft. This Would Mean that Pilots Would be Unable to Train Adequately for Employing the New Aircraft Standard.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

### D.4.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation - N/a
