---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers
Page_from: 148.0
Page_to: 169.0
Project_label: Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_148_169.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 55%" />
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Ship Acquisition
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Cdre Alex Burton RAdm Russ Harding
</Td>
<td>24-Sep-12 31-03-13

01-Apr-13
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects / Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier Conversion (Cancelled May 12)
</Td>
<td>post-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Requirement for the Queen Elizabeth Class Was Endorsed in the 1998 Strategic Defence Review which Identified a Continuing Need for Rapidly Deployable Forces with the Reach and Self-Sufficiency to Act Independently of Host-Nation Support. the Strategic Defence Review Concluded that the Ability to Deploy Offensive Air Power Would be Central to Future Force Projection Operations, with Carriers Able to Operate the Largest Possible Range of Aircraft in the Widest Possible Range of Roles. This Analysis Was Further Endorsed by the New Chapter Work of 2002 and the Defence White Paper in December 2003. the Current Invincible Class of Carriers Was Designed for Cold War Anti-Submarine Warfare Operations. with Helicopters and a Limited Air Defence Capability Provided by a Relatively Small Number of Embarked Sea Harriers, it Was Judged that this Capability Would No Longer Meet Future United Kingdom Requirements. It Was Therefore Decided to Replace the Invincible Class with Two Larger and more Capable Aircraft Carriers. the Class’s Offensive Air Power will be Provided Primarily by the Joint Combat Aircraft. the Joint Force Air Group is an Air Group Comprising a Mix of Aircraft, Tailored to the Mission Need; it will Typically Consist of both Fixed and Rotary-Winged Aircraft Including Joint Air Assets E.g. Joint Combat Aircraft.

The Strategic Defence & Security Review Confirmed the Requirement for a Carrier Strike Capability as Part of MOD’s Future Force 2020. in Order to Deliver Overall Savings to Defence, it Concluded that the Carrier Strike Component Would be Based Around the Carrier Variant of the Joint Strike Fighter which Would Fly from an Operational Queen Elizabeth Class Carrier Converted to a Carrier Variant Configuration (Fitted with Catapults and Arrestor Gear). the Strategic Defence &
Security Review Confirmed that both Carriers Should be Built, with One to be Operational and the Second Kept in Extended Readiness or Sold. Following Concerns over the Escalating Cost of the Catapults and Arrestor Gear, in May 2012 the Decision Was Made to Revert Back to a Short Take Off and Landing Solution for both Ships in Class. the Decision to Run One Operational Carrier and Keep One in Extended Readiness Was Retained, a Decision that is to be Reviewed in Strategic Defence & Security Review 2015. the Current Schedule will See the First in Class (HMS QUEEN ELIZABETH) Vessel Acceptance in 2017, First of Class Lightning II Flying Trails in 2018, which if Successful will Lead to Carrier Strike Initial Operating Capability Declaration in 2020.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Class Received Initial Gate Approval in December 1998 and Invitations to Tender Were Issued in January 1999. Following Tender Evaluation, Competitive Firm Price Contracts for the Assessment Phase, Each Potentially Worth some £30m, Were Awarded to BAE Systems and Thales UK in November 1999. Initially, the Assessment Phase Was Broken Down into Two Stages. the First Involved the Examination of Several Carrier Designs, and Helped Inform the Decision in January 2001 to Select the United States Joint Strike Fighter as the Option with Best Potential to Meet the Joint Combat Aircraft Requirement. Stage 1 Completed in June 2001, Following which Proposals from the Contractors for Stage 2 Were Considered, Together with an Assessment of their Views on the Level of Work Needed to Adequately De-Risk the Programme. After Careful Consideration, the Conclusion Was Reached that the Original Two-Stage Approach No Longer Offered Value for Money and the Assessment Phase Strategy Was Changed.

The Competitive Second Stage Was Revised and Shortened (Completing in November 2002) and Enabled the Competing Contractors to Concentrate on Refining their Designs and Taking Key Trade-Off Decisions. an Innovative Continuous Assessment Process Was Used Throughout to Evaluate the Contractors' Performance which Led to the Conclusion that an Alliance Approach Involving BAE Systems, Thales UK and the Department Represented the Best Approach to Future Aircraft Carrier. the Innovative Alliance Procurement Strategy Enabled the Full Exploitation of the Resources and Strengths of the Alliance Participants with the Shared Objective of Improving on Agreed Performance Targets and Was Announced in January 2003. a Third Stage of Assessment Was Therefore Taken Forward on this Basis to Further Increase the Maturity of the Design and Determine the Alliancing Strategy for Future Aircraft Carrier. Stage 3 Completed in March 2004.

In July 2004, the Assessment Phase Was Extended into Stage 4 to Further Mature the Design and Carry Out Risk Reduction Work, to Ensure that the Best Technical & Procurement Solution Was Achieved. Alliancing Principles Were Agreed with BAE Systems and Thales UK and Further Developed with the Selection in February 2005 of Kellogg, Brown & Root UK Ltd as an Additional Participant in the Alliance. the Timescale for Completing the Design and Risk Reduction Work Was Further Extended in August 2005 (into Stage 5) Although this Did not Result in any Additional Cost to the Programme. the Assessment Phase Completed at the End of January 2006 and Was Finalised in November 2010, on Receipt of Final Cost Certificates, at a Revised Total Cost of £288m.

## A.3. Project History

Following Direction from the Investment Approvals Board, the Project Has Adopted an Incremental Approach to Main Gate Approval with the Demonstration and Manufacturing Phases Being Divided into Two Sequential Main Gate Approval Points. the First Phase (Demonstration), which Included Expanding the Alliance to Include Babcock Engineering Services and VT Shipbuilding, Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board and Treasury in December 2005. the Total Cost of the Demonstration Phase (Excluding Indirect Resource Departmental Expenditure Limit, but Including Non Recoverable VAT) Was Approved at
£297m (not to Exceed).

The Demonstration Phase Activity Completed in Mid 2008 with Total Expenditure to 31st March 2011 of £266m. the Second and Final Main Gate Approval, to Proceed with the Manufacturing Phase of the Project Was Announced by Secretary of State on 25th July 2007 at a not to Exceed Cost of £3900m Including the Capitalised Assessment Phase Costs and Demonstration Phase Costs.

In March 2006, the UK Agreed a Memorandum of Understanding that Provides for the Supply to France of a Common Baseline Design Data Pack to Enable French Industry to Bid for the Design, Manufacture and Support of One Future Aircraft Carrier (France). France Has Paid an Initial Entry Fee and Contributed to the Costs of the UK Demonstration Phase.

At the Time of the Main Gate in 2007, the Build Strategy Called for One of the Lower Blocks to be Constructed at the BAE Systems Submarines Yard in Barrow-in-Furness. BAE Systems Needed to Build a New Facility - The Central Assembly Shop - In Order to Accommodate the Construction of the Block. It Was Envisaged at the Time that the Facility Would also be Beneficial to the Future Submarine Programme. MOD Authorised BAE Systems to Begin Site Work in June 2007. in July 2008 the Alliance Management Board Agreed to the Reallocation of Lower Block 3 to the A&P Tyne Yard on a ‘best for Project’ Basis and in December 2008 the Aircraft Carrier Alliance Formally Instructed BAE Systems to Terminate the Contract and Fully Justify any Incurred Costs. It Was Hoped that the Work Carried Out in Barrow Would be of Use to the Future Submarine Programme, However this Did not Come to Fruition which Led to a Write-Off of £8m in Financial Year 2009-10.

Following Main Gate Approval the Project Moved into the Engineering Transition Phase, an Extension of the Demonstration Phase to Encompass the Period Prior to Contract Signature. on 3rd July 2008 a Contract Was Signed with BVT Surface Fleet for the Manufacture of the Two Carriers Together with Signature of an Alliance Agreement with all Members of the Alliance.

On 11 December 2008, Ministers Announced the Outcome of MOD’s Equipment Examination Including the Intention to Re-Profile the Queen Elizabeth Class Project to Meet Near Term Priorities and Improve the Scope of Alignment with the Joint Combat Aircraft Programme. the Re-Profiling Measure Removed £450m from the Next Four Years and Delayed in-Service Dates of the Two Carriers by 1 and 2 Years Respectively. the Cost Estimates of the Impact of the Examination on the Project Were Approved by the MOD in February 2010.

The First Cut of Steel Took Place in July 2009 at the Govan Shipyard in Glasgow, and Manufacture Subsequently Conducted in Six UK Shipyards: Babcock Rosyth and Appledore, BAE System Surface Ships, Govan, Portsmouth, Cammell Laird Birkenhead and A&P Tyne.

In 2009 a Number of Significant Milestones Were Achieved: Completion of No.1 Dock at Rosyth; Delivery of an Upper Deck Section from Appledore to Rosyth; Delivery of the Highly Mechanised Weapon Handling System and the Delivery of Emergency Diesel Generators.

At the Close of the Financial Year in March 2010 the Bow of the Queen Elizabeth Departed from Appledore for Rosyth.

The Aircraft Carrier Alliance Acknowledged that There Was a Requirement to Reduce Costs at the Time of Contract Award on the Basis that Concerted Management Action in the Early Years of the Project Would Allow this to Reduce. in the Event, the Disruption Caused by Initial Recosting Activity and then the Equipment Examination Prevented Successful Delivery of the Originally Planned Cost Reduction - As this Would not be Achieved, MoD Considered it Prudent to Formally Recognise this in Its Revised Estimate.

During 2010 Diesel Generators Were Installed in Lower Block 02 (Portsmouth) and in March 2011 in Lower Block 04 (Govan) on HMS Queen Elizabeth. in Early 2011, the Goliath Crane, Used to Assemble the Carriers, Arrived at Rosyth.

The Investment Approvals Board Approved the Queen Elizabeth Class Final Target Cost for the preStrategic Defence & Security Review Programme on 31 January 2011 to £5242m. Long-Lead Equipments for HMS Prince of Wales Have Been Ordered over the Last Four Years, with many of the Major Components Already in-Build or Delivered (E.g. Diesel Generators).

In October 2010, the Strategic Defence & Security Review Concluded that One Carrier Would be Fitted with Catapults and Arrestor Gear to Operate the F35C Carrier Variant of the Joint Strike Fighter. the Other Carrier Would not be Converted and Placed into Extended Readiness. an 18 Month Investigation into How Best to Achieve this Formally Began in Spring 2011 with Assistance from the US. as this Work Proceeded, it Became Clear the the Cost of Conversion, and the Time Needed, Was Far Greater than Initially Thought. as a Result, it Was Announced in May 2012 that the Carriers Would Revert to their Original Short Take Off and Landing Configuration and Operate the F-35b Joint Strike Fighter. the National Audit Office Have Separately Examined the 2010 and 2012 Decisions.

The Goliath Crane Was Delivered to Rosyth in March 2011. It Was Assembled and Tested over the Next Two Months and Was Commissioned (Ready for Use) in June 2011 with Steelwork Beginning on HMS PRINCE of WALES’s Lower Block 03 at Govan, with a Formal Steel Cut Ceremony Held on 26 May 2011.

Lower Block 03 for HMS Queen Elizabeth Class Arrived at Rosyth No.1 Dock in Early September 2011 from Govan, with Work to Join Centre Block 03 (Tyne) to Lower Block 03 Later in the Month Marking the Start of the Assembly Phase on the Project. Over the Next few Months, Sponsons 03-06 Were Attached, with the Final Sponson (05) Join Completing in February 2012.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

The Build of the First Carrier Has Made Significant Progress this Year, with over 50,000 Tonnes Now in the Dock at Rosyth. Both Gas Turbines Have Been Installed, the Forward and Aft Islands Have Been Lowered into Place on the Flight Deck and the Ramp Has Been Installed. Work on the Second Carrier is Increasing, with Work Underway on Four Lower Blocks, Two Centre Blocks and some of the Sponsons.

In May 2012, the Secretary of State Announced the Department's Decision to Revert to the Pre Strategic

Defence and Security Review Position of Operating the Queen Elizabeth Class as a Short Take-Off and Vertical Landing Platform. This Meant that the Carrier Development Phase Work - The Activity to Investigation Options to Convert One Carrier to Operate the Carrier Variant of the Joint Strike Fighter (F35C) Formally Initiated in May 2011 - Was Cancelled. the Decision to Revert will Result in a Write Off of Costs Accrued Up to 10 May 2012. the Estimated Write-Off Costs are not Expected to Exceed £55 Million. the Full Impact of Reverting to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing is Currently Being Considered and will Form Part of the Final Write-Off Business Case.

The ACA Formally Began Rebaselining the QEC Programme in July 2012 and Provided their Initial Findings to the MOD-Chaired Alliance Management Board (AMB) in November 2012. Faced with a Significant Level of Cost Growth, MOD Began Detailed Discussions with the ACA, with the Aim of Rebalancing the Risk/Reward Mechanism. These Continued Throughout the First Half of 2013, Culminating in a Formal Proposal from the ACA on 19 July 2013. on Receipt of this Proposal, the MOD Cost Assurance and Analysis Service (CAAS) Were Commissioned to Undertake Further Investigations, which Once Again Highlighted a Series of Challenges, or Areas where Cost Could be Reduced. MOD 2\ and 3\ Led Sessions Were Convened to Ensure Appropriate Rigour Had Been Applied in Reviewing the ACA Proposal and to Agree Resolution. Through this Mechanism some £252m of Costs Were Driven Out Prior to Final Negotiations. During the Negotiations in Late October1203, a Further Reduction to the Target Cost of £96m Was Agreed, Resulting in a Total Cost Reduction of £348m Compared to the ACA's July 13 Proposal Position. Subsequently, a Heads of Terms Agreement Was Signed Between MOD and the ACA on 6 Nov 13, which Set Out the Commercial Principals Covering the Agreement and Work is Now Underway to Obtain Programme Re-Approval from the MOD Approving Authorities. a Revised Contract will be Signed Once this Has Been Achieved.

At the Industrial Level, the Revised QEC Programme Underpins the Wider Deal Reached with BAES on the Future of UK Shipbuilding Announced by the Secretary of State on 6 November 2013.

The Major Projects Report 2013 Covers the 2012-2013 Financial Year for all Projects. the Report Uses Financial Data from the Equipment Plan 2013-2023 which Was Formally Agreed by Secretary of State in March 2013. Although, the Negotiations for the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers Were Concluded on 6th November 2013 (Outside of the MPR2013 Reporting Period), the Department Had Allocated a Budget for the Additional Cost in Its Equipment Plan 2013-2023.

Until the Carrier Deal Was Agreed, the NAO Could not Report on the Department’s Budgeted Total Forecast Cost of the Carriers Due to the Ongoing Commercial Negotiations. as These Negotiations Have Now Been Completed, the Total Forecast Cost of the Carriers can Now be Disclosed in the Report. the Cost Disclosed is Consistent with the Secretary of State’s Announcement on 6 November 2013 and is Reflected in the Department’s Financial Plans.

Although the Department’s Budgeted Position in March 2013 and the Final Negotiated Position in November 2013 are Different, Reporting the Budgeted Position in March 2013 Would be Out of Date. Therefore, the Report Provides an Enhanced Position than Would Otherwise be the Case, with the Cost Variation that Has Resulted from the Deal Reported as if it Was a 2012-2013 in-Year Variation. All Other Project Costs Remain Correct as at 31st March 2013.

## A.5. Capability Risks

The Class Is, Together with the Lightning II F35B and Merlin Mk2 CROWSNEST and Deemed the

Carrier Strike Change Programme, an Essential Element of the Carrier Enabled Power Projection Programme: it Exploits the Attributes of Maritime, Air and Land Forces to Deliver or Threaten Action Across Three Environments. Specifically for Queen Elizabeth Class, the Strategic Defence & Security Review 2010 States 'The Queen Elizabeth Class Carrier, Operating as Part of a Response Force Task Group will be a Key Basing Option for the Projection of Air and Amphibious Power in Support of National Influence and Future Complex or Simple Non-Enduring Intervention Operations'.

Lightning II Maritime Capability Depends on the Queen Elizabeth Class to Achieve Carrier Strike.

Strategic Defence & Security Review 2010 Further Stated that "The Current, Limited Carrier-Strike Capability will be Retired" Because"
Short-Range Harriers ... Would Provide Only a Very Limited Coercive Capability. We Judge it Unlikely that this Would be Sufficiently Useful in the Latter Half of the Decade to be a Cost-Effective Use of Defence Resources". This will Create a Capability Gap until a Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier Has Completed Integration with the First Operational Squadron of Lightning II Aircraft.

Strategic Defence & Security Review 2010 Accepted a Capability Gap in the Operation of Fixed Wing Aircraft from 2011 to 2020. This Has Resulted in a Risk to the Re-Generation of this Element of Carrier

Enabled Power Projection, which is Being Addressed by Work Across Multiple Defence Lines of

Development, Including the Analysis of the Experience Gained from the US and French Navies.

The Reduced Availability of the Queen Elizabeth Class Platform as a Result of the Strategic Defence & Security Review 2010 Decision to Operate a Single Carrier may (Depending on Future Decisions) Reduce the Availability of this Element of Carrier Enabled Power Projection.

Queen Elizabeth Class is not Fully Funded to Deliver the Helicopter Carrying Role in Support of Littoral Manoeuvre and the Design and Safety Clearance in Its Amphibious Helicopter Support Capability is Currently Limited.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 58%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>approval Status</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Infrastructure Project</Td>
<td>2016</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>defence Information</Td>
<td>2014</Td>
<td>post Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>medium Range Radar</Td>
<td>
2012
</Td>
<td>
Post Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class in Service Support Solution</Td>
<td>
2016
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>
Contractor
</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems

Insyte / Thales /

Kellogg Brown &amp;

Root /

VT Shipbuilding /
Babcock Support Services / BAE System Marine
</Td>
<td>demonstration to Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Target Cost Incentive Fee (Subsequently, from July 2007 the Engineering

Transition Stage as Cost

Reimbursement)
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - UK
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
BAE Surface Ships/ Mission Systems/ Babcock Marine/ Thales/
BAE Barrow
</Td>
<td>manufacture to in Service</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
Integrated Logistic Support Deliverables are Required to Enable Safe and Effective Operation and Support for the Queen Elizabeth Class. These Deliverables are Being Procured in the Main Through the Manufacturing Contract and will be Delivered Prior to Contract Acceptance of the First Platform. the Carrier in-Service Support Solution Project Aims to Provide Affordable, Value for Money, in-Service Engineering and Spares Logistic Support from Contract Acceptance. It is Split into 4 Key Phases;
Assessment, Development, Mobilisation and Delivery. the Support Assessment Phase is Now Complete and Approval to Commence the Support Development Phase will be Sought in Feb 14 that will Produce a Detailed Design Solution for Stage 1 Support. in 2015 Main Gate Approval will be Sought to Mobilise and Deliver Stage 1 Support to HMS Queen Elizabeth from QEC Logistics Support Date of Dec 2016. Stage 1 Support Solution is Coherent with both the Ships Operating Centre Support Strategy and the Navy Command Support Vision.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
Aircraft Carrier Alliance -
Industrial Participants
</Td>
<td>
Assessment Phase in Increments
</Td>
<td>
Cost Reimbursment Moving to Target Cost
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive - UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a Proportion of Total Estimated

Procurement

Expenditure (%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier</Td>
<td>120</Td>
<td>288</Td>
<td>+168</Td>
<td>2%</Td>
<td>5%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>conversion (Cancelled May 12)</Td>
<td>56</Td>
<td>55</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>176</Td>
<td>343</Td>
<td>+167</Td>
<td>3%</Td>
<td>6%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Approved (£m)</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Approved (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier</Td>
<td>
3191
</Td>
<td>
3541
</Td>
<td>
3791
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier</Td>
<td>3541</Td>
<td>6102</Td>
<td>+2561</Td>
<td>+754</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>3541</Td>
<td>6102</Td>
<td>+2561</Td>
<td>+754</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 34%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
November 2013
</Td>
<td>
-96
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>cost Reductions Agreed During Final Commercial Negotiations Between MOD and the Aircraft Carrier Alliance (ACA).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
November 2013
</Td>
<td>
-71
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>more Efficiently Compressed Sea Trials Programme Including Early Transfer of Vessel from Rosyth to Portsmouth.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
November 2013
</Td>
<td>
-181
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Processes
</Td>
<td>cost Reductions as a Result of the in Depth Review Carried Out by MOD (Cost Assurance and Analysis Service) and the ACA. Issues Identified Include Duplication and Estimating Subjectivity.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 34%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
November 2013
</Th>
<th>-19</Th>
<th>procurement Processes</Th>
<th>reduced Target Cost Incentive Fee (TCIF) Payable to the ACA as Part of the Agreement.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+144</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>current Target Cost Set at a Higher Certainty Level than at Final Target Cost (FTC) with Share Arrangements Altered to Reflect a Shift in the Balance of Risk and Reward to Make it more Favourable for the Department.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+35</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>better Understanding of Activity Originally Considered to be Within the Scope of Support Has Resulted in Its Transfer to Procurement, Together with the Associated Budget.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+28</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>increased Cost to Reflect Revised Apportionment of Overhead Recovery Against Updated Yard Hour Throughput Assumptions.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reduction in Cost Estimates for Government Furnished Assets as a Result of Maturing Programme Information.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>-259</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>risk Budget Consumed by the Programme Cost Growth.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+216</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>many Opportunities for Cost Savings Recognised at the Final Target Cost Stage Have not Been Realised Resulting in Further Cost Increase.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>-23</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>internal ACA Reviews Identified Cost Savings Through Reduction in the Management Team Post Ship 2 Flood Up; Optimising the Use of Engineering Resources and Project Management Reorganisation Achievable from the Newly Implemented and Improved Project Controls System.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>review of Vessel Acceptance Identified Insufficient Budget for Defect Rectification in Terms of Cost and Time.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+10</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>expenditure on External Consultancy Support During the Rebaseline of the Programme Schedule and Costs Including Independent Validation and Verification of Schedule, Costs and Risks.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 34%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>july 2013</Th>
<th>+123</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>revised Bill of Materials (BoM) Estimate Including Labour and Material Cost as a Result Of: Maturing Engineering Data, Incorrect Design Quantities and Parts Specifications at the FTC Stage and Increased Scrappage Rates.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+150</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>improved Design Maturity Has Resulted in 17,000+ Change Requests Since the FTC Baseline Resulting in Work Being Undertaken Out of Sequence, Work Needing to be Repeated or Additional Work. Impact of Change Results in Increased Carryover from Build to Integration Yard with Resulting Impact Upon Time and Cost.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+65</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>significant Increase in Budget Requirements for Paint and Access Driven by Underestimation of Scope and Scale at FTC PMB, Extended Schedule, and Inadequate Provision for Change. the Contract Was Placed and Managed Centrally by the Alliance Management Team (to Achieve Economies of Scale Cost Savings) Resulting in a Lack of Budget Understanding and Accountability at the Local Working Level.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+33</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>following a Review of the Programme Management Processes in 2013, the Alliance Management Team Agreed to Further Investment to Strengthen Programme Management to Deliver the Rebaseline Programme (Schedule and Costs) Going Forward, Building on Lessons Learned to Date. This Includes the Development of the Mission Control Environment (Management Information), Additional Project Management, Controls and Engineering Resource.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+19</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>cost Increase Primarily Associated with Revised Estimates for Outfit and Assembly and Transferred Scope from Naval Ships and Cammell Laird to Rosyth.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 34%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>july 2013</Th>
<th>
+37
</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>elements of Cost Growth Related To: Late Delivery from HVAC (Heating, Ventilation &amp; Air Conditioning) Subcontractor, Extra Safety Management Resource and Increase in T&amp;S Budget to Reflect Higher Level of Resource Required.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>results from Changed Rates Assumptions (Overhead, Throughput and Direct Labour) from Those Assumed at FTC.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>
+32
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>net Cost Growth Across all Industrial Participants Resulting from Cost Increases/Decreases to Individual Work Packages, Activities and Overspends.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>
+12
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>the Ships Deliverable List Was Immature at the Time of FTC, There Was a List of Items but the Scope of Each Item Was not Agreed Between Industry and MoD. in Addition There Have Been some Gaps Identified where There Has Been Unclear Demarcation Between Industrial Participants</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>
+261
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>the Consequential Cost Impact Associated with Extension to the Schedule Durations E.g. Maintenance over a Longer Period, Warehousing / Storage Costs and Marching Army Costs. Elements of Schedule at FTC PMB Assumed Parallel Working which Has Since Proved Impractical. a Revised Sequential Schedule Has Resulted in Further Delay.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>
+101
</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>the Cost Increase Has Resulted in an Increase in Inflation.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>may 2012</Td>
<td>
+120
</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>relates to the Reversion Decision in May 2012 to a STOVL Carrier Including Ramp, Flight Deck Coating, Radar and Other Equipment Required to Operate STOVL Aircraft. of the £190m Total STOVL Costs Identified some Elements (£70m) Fall under the Approval and Budget of Other MOD Project Teams.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 34%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>
+217
</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>following the Agreement of Final Target Cost in 2010, the Aircraft Carrier Alliance are Reporting a Higher Estimate at Completion Cost. This Difference is Driven by a Combination of Factors, Key of which Are: Aircraft Carrier Alliance not Able to Fully Deliver Cost Reduction Opportunities Agreed at Final Target Cost (a Total of £312m Was Agreed) the Current Aircraft Carrier Alliance View is that some of this will not be Delivered (+£88m) (with the Remainder to be Determined); the Latest View of Overall Risk Exposure Has Increased Since Final Target Cost (+£134m); and a Reduction Against Escalation (£5m). with Commercial Discussions Ongoing, MOD’s Assessment of the Position is Being with-Held on the Basis that it may Prejudice Those Discussions but it Has Been Agreed that the Costs of the Programme for MPR20102 Should Reflect the Aircraft Carrier Alliance’s Estimate at Completion.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-13
</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>completion of Final Target Cost Negotiations with the Aircraft Carrier Alliance.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+190
</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>refinement of Cost Estimate Connected to the Equipment Examination.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+35
</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>an £8m Reduction on Inflation Following Refinement of Estimates Against Additional Costs of £43m for Government Furnished Equipment.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+337
</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>at the Time of Contract Award in 2008, There Was a Cost Challenge of
£337m which Was Expected to be Fully Reduced Through Cost Reduction Measures. the Impact of Slowing Down the Programme Prevented These from Being Delivered</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+117
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>various Factors Including Growth of Bill of Materials and the Impact of Build Strategy Changes.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+674
</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>financial Planning Round 2009 Resulted in an Option that Constrained the Queen Elizabeth Class in the First 4 Years, this will Cause Cost Growth of £674m over the Life of the Project.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+250
</Td>
<td>inflation</Td>
<td>the Queen Elizabeth Class Contracted Initial Target Cost is Set at April 2006 Economic Conditions Exposing the MOD to Inflation Fluctuations. the Current Procurement Contracts Were Placed During a Period of High Inflation And, Despite the Current Economic Downturn, Forecasts Covering the Whole of the Projects Life Indicated it Was Prudent to Allow for an Additional
£250m CDEL.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
+2561
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March

2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>326</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>320</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>2283</Td>
<td>718</Td>
<td>3001</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>2609</Td>
<td>712</Td>
<td>3321</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier</Td>
<td>
December 1998
</Td>
<td>
December 2005
</Td>
<td>84</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>conversion (Cancelled May 12)</Td>
<td>april 2011</Td>
<td>not Applicable</Td>
<td>not Applicable</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier</Td>
<td>
April 2015
</Td>
<td>
July 2015
</Td>
<td>
October 2015
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier</Td>
<td>in Service Date:
In Service Date for the QEC is Defined as the Date that the Vessel is Ready to Proceed to Operational Sea Training. a Prerequisite for this is a Formal Declaration that the Vessel Has Successfully Completed Safety and Readiness Check. Initial Operating Capability:
Initial Operating Capability (IOC) will be Declared when the Vessel Has Successfully Completed Operational Sea Training and the Operational Readiness Inspection. Operational Sea Training Consists of Two Phases:
Tier 1 – Basic Sea Safety and Survival at the Platform Level. Training as an Individual and Collectively to be Safe to Operate the Platform in any Condition. Tier 2 – More Comprehensive Training as a Unit to Include the Basic Warfighting Capabilities and more Complex Emergencies.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers</Td>
<td>july 2015</Td>
<td>
December 2017
</Td>
<td>+29</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>july 2013</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>further Maturity of Time Estimates from the Aircraft Carrier Alliance Has Identified Programme Extension of 14 Months which Includes, and Brings Refinement to the +9 Month Reported in MPR12. Major Drivers:
<ul>
<li>delays Relating to Change, which Includes an Element of Carry-over Work and the Impact of Changing the Carrier Configuration from STOVL to CV Back to STOVL. This Was Necessary as a Result of Blocks Being Transferred Incomplete from the Shipbuild Yards to the Integration Yard, and Therefore Work Needing to be Completed in Rosyth. It Was Previously Assumed that it Would be Possible to Carry Out this Work in Parallel, but this Has Now Had to be Incorporated into the Time Needed for Assembly (+6 Months).</Li>
<li>reduced Access as a Result of Delay (See above) and Carry over Work Has Caused Disruption to Mission Systems Original Timeframe, Resulting in an Extension (+5 Months).</Li>
<li>an Analysis Based Upon Norms from Similar Programmes Identified an Underestimation of Elements of the Commissioning, Sea Trials and Defect Rectification Periods (+5 Months).</Li>
<li>a Stronger Shift Pattern in Assembly Through Increased Night Shifts Has Meant a Reduction in Outfit Periods (4.5 Months).</Li>
<li>resulted from Changes to the Sequencing of Mission Systems Events (-2.5 Months).</Li>
<li>the Bottom-Up Rebaseline Exercise Allowed Full Understanding of the Complex Iterations Between the Mission Systems and Platform Programmes for the First Time; Concerns Around the Availability of Ships Services to Meet the Mission Systems Demand Has Led to Further Delay (+5 Months).</Li>
</Ul></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+9</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>the Project Team, in Conjunction with the Aircraft Carrier Alliance, Had an Improved Understanding of the Build Schedule with the Latest Time Risk Analysis Identifying a Revised 50% Estimate for Contract Acceptance Date. This Points to a Potential for a 9 Month Slip which the Project Team Considers Prudent to Report.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>the Aircraft Carrier Alliance Continues to Work to Build Strategy 5, which Was First Announced in March 2009 Following the Equipment Examination. as Part of the Final Target Cost Analysis, the Aircraft Carrier Alliance Have Revisited their Monte-Carlo Analysis not Only in Terms of Cost but also Schedule. Risk and Uncertainty Assumptions Around Integration, Commissioning and Trials Have Been Updated and Fully Aligned to Those Used for Costing of Final Target Cost. Analysis that both the Project Team and Cost Assurance &amp; Analysis Services Support Suggests that Contract Acceptance Dates for the Two Queen Elizabeth Class Vessels Should Now be June 2016 for Queen Elizabeth and September 2018 for Prince of Wales. Allowing for Transition from Contract Acceptance Date to in Service Date Gives a Revised in Service Dates as October 2016 and December 2018.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>ministerial Announcement that Queen Elizabeth and Prince of Wales in Service Dates will be Delayed as a Result of the Financial Planning Round 2009 Option</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>industry and Capital Ship Current Estimates are that the Current Schedule Contains Sufficient Flexibility to Allow for Mitigating Actions to be Taken.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>+29</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>marine Equipment Systems</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+6</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>communication Situation Awareness</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td Rowspan="4">ministerial Announcement that

Queen Elizabeth Class in Service

Dates will be Delayed as a Result of the Financial

Planning Round

2009 Option</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>naval Electronic Warfare</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>t45 Overhead</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+63</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cvs Run-on Costs</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+49</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">total</Td>
<td>123</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier</Td>
<td>the Equipment Examination Introduced a Slip in the in Service Date which Would Have Required the Extension in the Service of HMS Illustrious in Order to Maintain Carrier-Strike Capability, the Strategic Defence and Security Review Stated that "The Current, Limited Carrier-Strike Capability will be Retired" Because "Short-Range Harriers... Would Provide Only a Very Limited Coercive Capability. We Judge it Unlikely that this Would be Sufficiently Useful in the Latter Half of the Decade to be a Cost Effective Use of Defence Resources". This will Create a Capability Gap until a Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier Has Completed Integration with the First Operational Squadron of Joint Combat Aircraft.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers</Td>
<td>yet to be Defined</Td>
<td>the Full Operational Capability will be Largely Determined by the Combination of Joint Force Air Group Elements and the Queen Elizabeth Class Incremental Acquisition Plan. Full Operating Capability will Therefore be Defined Once the Joint Combat Aircraft and Maritime Airborne Surveillance
&amp;
Control Delivery Programmes and the Initial Approved Plan are Agreed. Full Operating Capability will Allow Queen Elizabeth Class to Have an Embarked Joint Force Air Group and a Level of Capability Equivalent to that Declared at Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
47 Red
</Td>
<td>
54 Red
</Td>
<td>the QEC SENTINEL Score Continues to be Driven by the Breach in Cost and Time Parameters as both These Metrics are Heavily Weighted. in Addition, the Lack of Three Point Estimate (this is a Time Related Metric) Has Caused an Additional Slip in the Score.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>delivery of 2 Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers to the Required Performance Specification.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>provision of Individual and Collective Training both Ashore and Afloat for Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers that Delivers the Appropriate Level of Operational Capability to Meet the Readiness Profiles in the Naval Data Book.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>provision of Support Solution that Enables the Operational Movement and Maintenance of Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>provision of Support Infrastructure and Facilities in the MOD Estate to Support Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and their Associated Equipments and Personnel.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>provision of Sufficient, Correctly Trained and Suitably Equipped Personnel Available to Participate in Commissioning, Trials and Handover of the Ship, then Subsequent Operation of the Ships in Service.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>provision of Framework of Practices and Procedures to Derive the Greatest Benefit from using the Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers in a Range of Operations and Scenarios.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>establish a Robust and Deliverable Command Structure for Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers with Correctly Qualified Personnel in Place in Time to Support the Programme</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>coherent Development of Data, Information and Knowledge Requirements for Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and all Processes Designed to Gather, Handle Data and Exploit Information and Knowledge.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (4)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (4)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2. Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>defence Line of Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Confirmed that both Carriers Should be Built. in May 2012, the Department Reverted Back to the STOVL Variant Meaning both Hulls will Operate the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant of the Joint Strike Fighter. However, There are Risks Associated to the Uncertainty Around the Final Queen Elizabeth Class Solution which Could Result in Cost and Schedule Impact Beyond Those Reported in this Year's MPR.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the 2011 Monte Carlo'd Simulated Estimate for Completion of the Infrastructure Upgrade to Portsmouth Identified a Risk that Base Port for Queen Elizabeth Could not be Ready in Time for First Entry Portsmouth. This Risk Has Now Been Mitigated, However the Cost and Schedule Risk of Providing Two Fully Serviced Berths in the Future Has yet to be Resolved.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Confirmed that both Carriers Should be Built, with the Current Intention to Convert One Hull to Operate the Carrier Variant of the Joint Strike Fighter. the Risks Connected to the Development and Integration of Electro Magnetic Launch Systems and Advanced Arrestor Gear Technology.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Risks Associated with Having Sufficient Trained, Suitably Qualified and Experience Personnel to Operate the Electro Magnetic Launch Systems.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Risks Associated with Ensuring Suitably Qualified and Experienced Aviation Personnel to Operate the Converted Queen Elizabeth Aircraft Carrier.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>early Cost Estimates Exceed Provision, Necessitating Further Investigation of the Options to Ensure an Affordable Position</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Risks Associated with the Integration of Joint Combat Aircraft and the Queen Elizabeth Class Has Been Addressed by the Equipment Defence Lines of Development Steering and Integration Group. Analysis of the Interface Issues Between Aircraft and the Ship Has Been Conducted and Significant Progress Has Been Made in Addressing the Issues Idenitified. as a Result, the Integration Risk is Now Assessed as Low.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>information Defence Lines of Development Remains at Risk Due to Uncertainty over the Resolution of Joint Combat Aircraft Integration into UK Global Information Infrastructure.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1. Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>interoperability – Queen Elizabeth Class Shall be Able to Operate with Joint/Combined Forces to Deliver a Medium Scale Offensive Air Effort for Power Projection, Focused Intervention and Peace Enforcement Operations</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kur 2</Th>
<th>all</Th>
<th>integration –
Queen Elizabeth Class Shall be Able to Integrate with all Elements of Joint/Combined Forces Necessary to Conduct Strike Operations and Support ‘agile Mission Groups’</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>availability –
Queen Elizabeth Class Shall Provide One Platform at High Readiness for Its Principal Role of Carrier Strike at Medium Scale and at Very High Readiness for CS Small Scale Focused Intervention, at all Times.</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>yes</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>deployability –
Queen Elizabeth Class Shall be Able to Deploy for the Operations in the Core Regions as Defined in Defence Strategic Guidance 05</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>sustainability – Queen Elizabeth Class Shall be Able to Conduct Deployments Away from Port Facilities for Operations Lasting 9 Months Continuously and Support Air Operations for Up to 70 Days</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>aircraft Ops –
Queen Elizabeth Class Shall be Able to Deploy the Full Medium Scale Offensive Air Effort</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 7</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>survivability –
Queen Elizabeth Class Shall Achieve a High Probability of Protection, Survival and Recoverability Against both Natural Incidents and Those Threats Identified in the Defence Intelligence Scale Threat Statement (October 2004)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 8</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>flexibility – the Queen Elizabeth Class Shall be Able to Operate and Support the Full Range of Defined Aircraft and be Adaptable Such that it Could Operate Air Vehicles which Require Assisted Launch/Recovery</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur9</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>versatility – Queen Elizabeth Class Shall be Able to Deploy Agile Mission Groups</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review Confirmed that both Carriers Should be Built, with One to be Operational and the Second in Extended Readiness or Sold. with this Change of Readiness Requirement Announced And, Although the Department Has Chosen to Revert Back to the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Aircraft Variant, it Has Still not Comitted to Two Ship Operation. Therefore One Ship will be Operational and the Other at Extended Readiness.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

| Date | Key Performance Measure | Forecast | Operational Impact of Variation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|---------------|---------------|---------------|----------------------------|
| Historic | KUR 3                       | at Risk      | the Reduced Availability of the Queen Elizabeth Class Platform as a Result of the Strategic Defence & Security Review Decision to Operate a Single Carrier may (Depending on Future Decisions) Reduce the Availability of this Element of Carrier Enabled Power Projection , Although this Could be Offset by Conversion of the Second Hull or Close Cooperation with the French Navy. |

## D.4. Support Contract - N/a
