---
Year: 2010.0
Project_type: Support Projects
Project: Trojan and Titan
Page_from: 292.0
Page_to: 299.0
Project_label: Trojan and Titan
Project_type_label: Support Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2010_292_299.md
---
Systems. This is a Significant Package of Work which will be Carried Out at BAE Systems’ Factory in Newcastle; the Current Completion Date for this is February 2012. Full Operating Capability will be Declared when the all Vehicles Have Been Upgraded to Final Acceptance Build Standard.

Three Trojans (at Batch 5 Standard) Were Deployed to Afghanistan in January 2010 in Support of Operation Moshtarak.

## A.4. Capability Risks

There is a Requirement to Procure a Complementary Pair of Armoured Engineer Vehicles to Provide Effective Close Mobility, Counter-Mobility and Survivability Support to Current and Future Armoured and Armoured Infantry Ground Manoeuvre Formations. Trojan and Titan Have Replaced their Chieftainbased Predecessors that Could not Keep Up with Other Armoured Assets that are 2 Generations Younger. the Chieftain Platforms Were Unreliable, Difficult to Support and Restricted the Tempo of Armoured Operations. in Order to Introduce Timely Capability, the Trojans and Titans Have Been Procured in 5 Batches with Reliability Growth Trials Conducted on Each Batch Prior to the Batch Entering Service. Trojan and Titan are Key Components of a Coherent Ground Manoeuvre Capability.

## A.5. Associated Projects - Not Applicable.

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>trojan &amp; Titan</Td>
<td>bae Systems (Vickers Defence System)</Td>
<td>
Demonstration

&amp;
Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>competitive</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

### A.7.1. Support / Service / PFI Contract Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th Colspan="4"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan &amp; Titan</Td>
<td Colspan="4">the Trojan &amp; Titan Support Strategy is Similar to Challenger 2’s, Due to the High Degree of Commonality Between the Platforms.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>contract Scope</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
To Reduce Risk for the MOD it Was Decided to Adopt a Single Source Route with BAE Systems as the Prime Contractor. BAE Systems Owns the Depth Repair Data and Deals Directly with the Manufacturers of the Subcontracted Repairable Items.
</Td>
<td>
BAE Systems
</Td>
<td>
In-Service
</Td>
<td>
Repair Enabling Arrangement
</Td>
<td>
Single Source
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Trojan &amp; Titan Were Added to the Existing Contract that the Challenger 2 Project Had with Multipart.
</Td>
<td>
Multipart
</Td>
<td>
In-Service
</Td>
<td>
Target Cost Incentive Fee
</Td>
<td>
Competitive
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">actual /

Forecast

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>approved Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement</Th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a

Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>expenditure (%)</Td>
<td>expenditure (%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cost of Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td>
0.9%
</Td>
<td>
2.3%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
8
</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td>
0.9%
</Td>
<td>
2.3%
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 47%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)
</Th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost Boundaries</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
349
</Td>
<td>
398
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year

Variation

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>398</Td>
<td>347<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1"
Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A></Td>
<td>-51</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td>398</Td>
<td>347</Td>
<td>-51</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">the Cost Figure Includes £16m Relating to the Transfer of Equipment into the Titan &amp; Trojan Project. Insufficient Evidence Was Available for the NAO to Validate the Value of the Equipment at the Time of Transfer.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back"
Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1. Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>increase in Cost of Capital Charge Due to Re-Profiling of Costs and Deliveries</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>bae Systems Support to Conduct Emerging Works Identified During Final Acceptance Build Standard Upgrade Programme</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>modifications Required to Protect Front of Trojan from Fragmentation Damage During Mineploughing Operations.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>november 2008</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>additional Spares to Support the Final Acceptance Build Standard Upgrade Programme</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>april 2008</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>additional Contractor Support for Batch Tests 4 and 5. the MOD Requires Support to Ensure Compliance with the Technical Aspects of the Contracted Requirements. This Qualified Technical Support is not Available from MOD Resources so AES Defence Ltd Has Been Contracted to Do It.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>august 2007</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>additional BAE Systems Support to Batch Tests 3-5</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>april 2007</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>additional Integrated Support Requirements. These Include Additional Ancillaries, Publications and Changes to the Training Aids.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>april 2007</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>additional Technical Support from BAE Systems Arising from Technical Challenges</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Increase in Cost of Capital Charge Due to Re-Profiling of Costs and

Historic +7 Technical Factors

Deliveries Due to Programme

Delays

Accounting

Actual Spend in 2004-2005 Lower

Historic -2 Adjustments and

Than Forecast

Re-Definitions

Accounting

Reclassification of Element of

Historic -4 Adjustments and

Spares Costs to Consumables Re-Definitions

Changed Increased Cost of Bowman

Historic +2

Requirement Integration

Contracting Under Spend Against Support &

Historic -1

Process Test Equipment Provision

Contracting Deletion of Requirement to Convert

Historic -1

Process Prototype Vehicles

£4m Increase in Forecast Costs

Changed Through Bowman Associated

+5

Historic Requirement Delays. £1m for Contract

Amendment

Accounting Decrease in Cost of Capital Charge

Historic -18 Adjustments and Due to Re-Profiling of Costs and

Re-Definitions Deliveries

Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the

Highest Acceptable (90%)

Historic -50 Risk Differential Estimates at Main Gate. Includes

Subsequent Recalculation of Approval Figures for Change in Cost of Capital to 3.5%

Net Variation -51

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration & Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 67%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan &amp; Titan</Td>
<td>
There Has Been No Operational Impact Due to the Cost Variation of Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.4. Unit Production Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">
Description
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Unit Production Costs (£m)
</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
<th>
At Main

Investment Decision</Th>
<th>
Currently
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan &amp; Titan</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td>
66
</Td>
<td>
66
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.5. Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 46%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Cost</Th>
<th>forecast Cost<a Href="Fn1" Class="Footnote-Ref"
Id="Fnref1" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A></Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan and Titan</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>771</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">
Assumptions.

• Support Costs Only Include the Main Equipment Support Contracts’
Costs. the Support Costs from the Other Non-Equipment Lines of Development (Training, People Etc) Have not Been Included.
• Several of These Contracts are for the Common Challenger Items;
which are also Found on Challenger 2 and Challenger Armoured Repair and Recovery Vehicle. the Trojan &amp; Titan Costs Have Been Calculated using Actual and Forecast Track Mileage; the Overall Contract Costs Have Been Apportioned Accordingly. 2 Although an Estimate of Whole Life Costs of £1051m Was Included in the Main Gate Business Case, No Formal Approval Was Made in Respect of in-Service Support Costs.<a Href="Fnref1" Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

### B.5.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

### B.5.2. Operational Impact of Support / Service / PFI Cost Variations - Not Applicable

## B.6. Expenditure to Date

Previous Total

In-Year

Description Expenditure to Expenditure to Expenditure Assessment Phase (£m) 8 - 8 Demonstration & Manufacture Phase (£m) 332 7 339 Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost (£m) 7 5 12 Total Expenditure (£m) 347 12 359

31 March 2009 31 March 2010

# C. Section C: Timescale

# D.

## D.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</Th>
<th>date of Initial Gate Approval</Th>
<th>length of

Assessment Phase

(Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan and Titan</Td>
<td>january 2001</Td>
<td>may 1996</Td>
<td>56</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>earliest Forecast /
Approved</Th>
<th>budgeted for (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects Only)</Th>
<th>latest Forecast / Approved</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan and Titan</Td>
<td>
October 2005
</Td>
<td>
October 2006
</Td>
<td>december 2006</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. in-Service Date

### D.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Trojan &amp; Titan
</Td>
<td>project in Service Date a Total of 12 Equipments (Six Trojan &amp; Six Titan) Delivered, and Supportable, to the Army Training and Recruiting Agency and HQ Land Command. Project Initial Operating Capability:
<ol Type="a">
<li>a Total of Three Titan and Three Trojan Have Been Delivered to a Close Support Engineer Squadron.</Li>
<li>the Crews for These Six Vehicles Have Undergone Individual Conversion Training.</Li>
<li>a Close Support Engineer Squadron Has Completed a Collective Training Level 3 Exercise.</Li>
<li>maintainers Have Been Trained to Undertake Level 2 and 3 Repair and Maintenance which Includes the Delivery of Publications and Support and Test Equipment.</Li>
<li>a Robust Spares Support Package Remains in Place.</Li>
</Ol></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>actual/ Forecast</Th>
<th>variation</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan &amp; Titan</Td>
<td>
December 2006
</Td>
<td>october 2006</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 in Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation
</Th>
<th>
Factor
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+5
</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>
This is the Result of Further Delays in the Bowman Integration Process which Has Impacted on Production Build Timescales.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+2
</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>
Production and Bowman Delays
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+3
</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>
Independent Risk Assessment of Delays Due to Bowman.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
+2
</Td>
<td>
Changed Requirement
</Td>
<td>
Forecast Revised Due to Decision to Fit Bowman and Manufacturing Problems as Assessed by Independent Risk Assessor.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-14
</Td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</Td>
<td>
Difference Between the Risk Allowed for in the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>
-2
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4 Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost / - Saving)</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Expenditure or Saving</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>trojan &amp; Titan</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
Additional Costs of Running on in Service Vehicles by Tank Systems Support IPT
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>trojan &amp; Titan</Td>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>
Claim Submitted by BAES in Respect of Bowman Delays. Value Written Off in Financial Year 2005/2006.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Trojan &amp; Titan
</Td>
<td>historic – No Operational Impact.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.4. Full Operating Capability

### D.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Trojan &amp; Titan
</Td>
<td>the Following Definition Has Been Approved by all the Relevant Stakeholders:
<ol Type="a">
<li>initial Operating Capability Declared (Encompassing Logistic Support Date)</Li>
<li>full Operating Capability Level of Reliability Achieved</Li>
</Ol></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td><ol Start="3" Type="a">
<li>100% System Acceptance Achieved (less any Agreed Noncompliance Issues)</Li>
<li>66 Vehicles Delivered and Supportable to Head Quarters Land Forces (in Accordance with the Current Fielding Plan)</Li>
<li>all Vehicles Upgraded to Final Acceptance Build Standard</Li>
<li>1 &amp; 3 (UK) Divisions Each Able to Crew, Deploy and Sustain a Single Engineer Regiment’s Complement of Trojan and Titan.</Li>
</Ol>
Head Quarters Land Forces Agreed that the Completion of the Final Acceptance Build Standard Upgrade Programme is a Pre-Requisite of Full Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.4.2. Progress Report

# D.4.3.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Trojan &amp; Titan
</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability will not be Achieved until the End of the Final Acceptance Build Standard Upgrade Programme which is Currently Planned for March 2012. This Has Slipped Due to Technical Problems on both Platforms; which Have Delayed Batch Test 5 and the Declaration of Final Acceptance Build Standard.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Service / PFI Contract

## C.5.1 Scope of Support Service / PFI Contract

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 71%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Trojan &amp; Titan
</Td>
<td>the Trojan &amp; Titan Main Contract Included the Following Deliverables:
<ul>
<li>spares</Li>
<li>publications</Li>
<li>training</Li>
<li>support &amp; Test Equipment</Li>
</Ul></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5.2 Progress Against Approved Support / Service / PFI Contract Go-Live Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>approved Date</Th>
<th>actual Date</Th>
<th>variation (Month)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (Month)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>logistic Support Date Was not Included in the Main Gate Approval, However, the Integrated Test Evaluation and Acceptance Plan Gave a Date of August 2005 (50%). at the Declaration of in Service Date, BAE Systems’s Failure to Deliver the Complete Support Solution Was Noted and the Expectation that it Would be Delivered by March 2007. Logistic Support Date Was Eventually Declared in August 2007</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>august 2007</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.5.2.1 Go-Live Date Variation - Not Applicable

## C.5.3 Progress Against Approved End of Support / Service / PFI Contract Date - Not Applicable.

# D. Section D: Performance

## E.1. Maturity Measures

### E.1.1. Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 14%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">maturity Area</Th>
<th>maturity Scale</Th>
<th>
Last Year’s Assessment
</Th>
<th>current Assessment</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">commercial</Td>
<td Rowspan="3"></Td>
<td Colspan="3" Rowspan="3">
<em>measures under Development</Em>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">financial</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">project Management</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">system Readiness</Td>
<td>1-9</Td>
<td>8</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">technology Readiness</Td>
<td>
Trojan
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">1-9</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>
Trojan Has Completed Missions in an Operational Environment and can be Considered to be at Technology Readiness Level 9
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Titan
</Td>
<td>7</Td>
<td>8</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## E.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 12%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">
Not Required for Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2">
Line of Development
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
Description
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">forecast</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
To be Met
</Td>
<td>
At Risk
</Td>
<td>
Not to be Met
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
66 Equipment
</Td>
<td Rowspan="8">
Not Detailed in Main Gate Approval
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
67 Training
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
68 Logistics
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
69 Infrastructure
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
70 Personnel
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
71 Doctrine
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
72 Organisation
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
73 Information
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">percentage Currently Forecast to be Met</Td>
<td Colspan="2">100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">in-Year Change</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### E.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>january 2010</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Deployment of Three Trojans to Afghanistan in January 2010 Has Required a Significant in-Theatre Spares Pack. These Spares are at the Latest Batch Standard, which Has Reduced the Availability of Several Key Spares for the Project’s Other Activities (Mainly Reliability Trialing and the Upgrading of Older Platforms). Additional Spares are Being Purchased to Reduce the Risk but some of These Have Long Leadtimes.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## E.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

### E.3.1. Project

# E.3.2.

### E.3.2.1. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 7%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">kpm</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
LOD
</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">description</Th>
<th></Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>to be Met</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>ur53</Td>
<td>
E/P/T
</Td>
<td>
The Trojan User Shall be Able to Clear Obstacles from Routes
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>ur63</Td>
<td>
E/P/T
</Td>
<td>
The Trojan User Shall be Able to Clear Ditch and Spoil Bank Obstacles from Routes
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>ur77</Td>
<td>
E/P/T
</Td>
<td>
The Trojan User Shall be Able to Open Safe Lanes Through Enhanced Pattern Minefields, in Order to Permit the Passage of Armoured and Mechanised Forces
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>ur85</Td>
<td>
E/P/T
</Td>
<td>
The Trojan User Shall be Able to Open Safe Routes Across Dry Gaps of Up to 7m Across and 2 m Depth.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR117
</Td>
<td>
E/P/T
</Td>
<td>
The Titan User Shall be Able to Open Safe Routes over Gaps of Up to 60m
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
SR1856
</Td>
<td>e</Td>
<td>
The Titan Shall be Able to Launch and Recover Bridges Whilst Fitted with the Track Width Mine Plough
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR146
</Td>
<td>e</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Afforded Levels of Mine Protection at Least as High as the in-Service Main Battle Tank
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR172
</Td>
<td>
E/P/T
</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Keep Station Tactically with Challenger 2 Equipped Armoured and Mechanised Formations in the Direct and Indirect Fire Zones
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR202
</Td>
<td>e/L</Td>
<td>
The User Requires an Operational Availability of 95% for a 30 Day Operating Period in the Warfighting Role
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
UR254
</Td>
<td>
E/P/L

/T</Td>
<td>
The User Shall be Able to Maintain the Required Capability While Operating in Climatic Category A1
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>100%</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### E.3.2.2. Key Performance Measures Variation – not Applicable

### E.3.2.3. Operational Impact of Variation – not Applicable

### E.3.3. Support Contract – not Applicable
