---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: TERRIER
page_from: 143.0
page_to: 150.0
project_label: TERRIER
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_143_150.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

TERRIER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

MANOEUVRE SUPPORT (MS)

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

Terrier is designed to be a highly mobile, robust and reliable armoured earthmoving vehicle, which will support mobility, counter mobility and survivability throughout the spectrum of conflict. It will be optimised for battlefield preparation and used by Close Support Engineer units. Terrier is being procured to replace the capability provided by the Combat Engineer Tractors. The programme was let under competitive tender and is currently in its Demonstration Phase. The Prototype vehicle has effectively completed its trials programme. Four demonstrator vehicles have been built and are commencing design proving and reliability improvement trials. Two Key User Requirements for protection (KUR 07 and 08) have been formally demonstrated and accepted, and climatic trails have been completed. The programme has been adversely affected by delays in the construction of the Demonstrator Vehicles and slower than expected reliability improvement on the Prototype Vehicle. As a result BAE Systems Land Systems has missed the Release for Production date and is in default of the contract. In accordance with the terms of the contract BAE Systems has submitted a rectification plan for the programme which is currently being reviewed by the Investment Approvals Board. The revised programme requires significant extra time to improve the vehicle reliability from its lower than expected start point and the consequences of this are reflected in this report. Release for Production (Milestone 12) remains the next key event and is now planned in the second quarter of 2008.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>Procurement Route</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>BAE Systems Land Systems (formally known as Royal Ordnance plc)</td>
<td>Demonstration to Manufacture</td>
<td>Firm/Fixed price</td>
<td>United Kingdom competition</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BAE Systems Land Systems (formally known as Royal Ordnance plc)</td>
<td>Contractor Logistic Support (first five years)</td>
<td>Fixed price</td>
<td>United Kingdom competition</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
313
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
304
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+9
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+14
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td>+14</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Late delivery of Demonstrator Vehicles combined with failure of Prototype to reach reliability target requires a longer reliability growth period in Demonstration. This has increased the Cost of Capital Charge and the Programme Support Costs.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Departmental Review - Inclusion of projected Year End Accruals for the remainder of the project. This change reduces the annual Net Assets balance and the subsequent Cost of Capital Charge.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+4</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Cost of Capital – Difference between the profile of the Asset Deliveries prior to contract placement and those included in the current forecast cost.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-17</td>
<td>Procurement Strategy</td>
<td>Requirements change for Bowman (-£9m) and Training Infrastructure (-£8m) transferred to separate projects.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+17</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>Requirements for Bowman and Training Infrastructure changed.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Date
</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>
Factor
</td>
<td>
Explanation
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+3
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Residual Terrier cost growth caused by, and remaining after, customer-driven Bowman requirements change.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-9
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
+9
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
135
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2008/2009
</td>
<td>
2009/2010
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3.1</td>
<td>
2.7
</td>
<td>65</td>
<td>
65
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
A total of 20 equipments delivered (4 to Army Training and Recruiting Agency &amp; 16 to Land Command) and supportable (Logistic Support Date achieved, training in place, 20 crews trained).
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
December 2011
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
December 2008
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+36
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+27
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td>+27</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Late delivery of Demonstrator Vehicles combined with failure of Prototype to reach reliability target requires a longer reliability growth period in Demonstration</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>Customer change in requirements for Bowman.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-3</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the approved figures at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+36</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Support costs of current equipment</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>There are no additional costs incurred as the Department plans to withdraw the existing equipment from service.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

Terrier will provide a highly agile, robust earthmoving capability which will have utility across the continuum of operations from warfighting to peace support. Terrier replaces the Combat Engineer Tractor which is being removed from service in March 2008 despite further delays to the Terrier programme. Restrictions on the Combat Engineer Tractor, primarily due to Bowman system safety concerns, reliability and industrial obsolescence had, in effect, already initiated a capability gap as Combat Engineer Tractor is not deployed on current operations. The subsequent delay to Terrier’s ISD extends the capability gap and removes contingent capability manoeuvre support until 2011. The 27 month delay to Terrier’s ISD could be partially mitigated by accepting a lower level of reliability; however, this compromise would increase the platform’s through life costs and its logistic support requirements. Trading Terrier’s reliability requirements would also decrease its operational availability. The User acknowledges the operational risk of the ISD variation and accepts the delay to the Terrier programme. However, the expressed

Customer preference is that Terrier’s reliability requirements are not compromised. The delayed ISD will still deliver sufficient Terrier to support a Medium Scale Contingent Operation by 2012 in accordance with extant Defence Policy.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>KUR Serial</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Forecast to be Met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>
User shall be able to dig vehicle slots
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>
User shall be able to dig, carry and load spoil &amp; rubble
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>
User shall be able to dig trenches
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>
User shall be able to grapple, grab and carry items weighing no more than 2 tonnes over short distances
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>
At battleweight should not exceed 31.5 tonnes
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>
User shall be able to deploy by air
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>
User shall be afforded levels of indirect fire protection commensurate with its role
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>
User shall be afforded levels of direct fire protection commensurate with its role
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>09</td>
<td>
User shall have a 70% probability of completing a battlefield mission without failure
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10</td>
<td>
User shall have a 13.5% probability of completing a Battlefield Mission without basic failure
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11</td>
<td>
User should be able to maintain required capabilities while operating in climatic categories A2 to C1
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
KUR 06
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>The air transportability of Terrier has been successfully addressed by the A400M Integrated Project Team through the placing of a contract amendment with Airbus Military Sociedad Limitada for a Locally Reinforced Cargo Floor. Terrier must be air transportable. Verification criteria requires this to be demonstrated in A400M. The A400M cargo floor loading study shows that it is possible to modify the floor to take Terrier. We are now awaiting the outcome of the Director of Equipment Capability Expeditionary Logistics &amp;
Support funding review</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

A funded feasibility study for Terrier concluded that the most cost-effective way of meeting the requirement was to develop a new vehicle, where possible integrating in-service sub-systems and commercial off-the-shelf equipment. Approval was given for a competitive Project Definition phase in August 1998 and Firm Price contracts were placed in August 1999 with BAE Systems (with the work undertaken by its subsidiary Royal Ordnance plc) and Vickers Defence Systems. Both contractors developed detailed designs making extensive use of Computer Aided Design tools, virtual reality modelling, rigs and trials. The capabilities required and constraints imposed by physical limitations, such as rail and air transportability, resulted in very similar technical solutions. Both contractors offered tracked vehicles close in size weight and mobility to the Warrior tracked infantry fighting vehicle, having a crew of two and providing protection against small arms, high explosive fragments and mines. An Invitation to Tender was issued in February 2001 to both companies which sought detailed proposals and prices for all later phases. The Invitation to Tender also adopted Smart Acquisition initiatives such as Progressive Acceptance and innovative Contractor Logistic Support proposals. The Main Gate Business Case was approved on 17 July 2002. The contract for Demonstration, Manufacture and Phase 1 Contractor Logistic Support was placed with Royal Ordnance plc on 19 July 2002.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 17                        | 5%                                                        |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 17                        | 5%                                                        |
| Variation                     | 0                         |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 2002
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
August 1998
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
47
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>284</td>
<td>294</td>
<td>304</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>291</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Forecast ISD at Main Gate
</td>
<td>
July 2008
</td>
<td>
September 2008
</td>
<td>
December 2008
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
December 2007
</td>
<td>
December 2008
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
