---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: TYPE 45 DESTROYER
page_from: 169.0
page_to: 180.0
project_label: Type 45 Destroyer
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_169_180.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

TYPE 45 DESTROYER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

TYPE 45 DESTROYER

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director of Equipment Capability (Above Water Effect)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The Type 45 is a new class of eight[^1] Anti-Air Warfare Destroyers, to replace the capability provided by the Royal Navy’s existing Type 42s. The warship is being procured nationally. The Type 45 will carry the Principal Anti-Air Missile System which is capable of protecting the vessels and ships in their company against aircraft and missiles, satisfying the Fleet’s need for area air defence capability into the 2030s. The Principal Anti-Air Missile System is being procured collaboratively with France and Italy. The Type 45 Integrated Project Team is responsible for providing the Principal Anti-Air Missile System to the warship Prime Contractor.

BAE Systems Electronics was appointed Prime Contractor for the Type 45 in November 1999 and a contract for Demonstration and First of Class Manufacture for the first three ships was placed in December 2000. A contract for a further three Type 45 hulls was placed with the Prime Contractor in February 2002. The ships are being built under sub-contract by BAE Systems Surface Fleet Solutions and VT Shipbuilding.

The BAE Systems contract has now been amended to reflect the Investment Approvals Board Six-Ship Approval gained in August 2007. This change has introduced a staged acceptance process for each ship which commences with Acceptance off Contract, thereby giving control of the vessel to the MoD to undertake a further period of trials and acceptance activity leading to the declaration of In-Service Date.

The past year has seen significant progress in the manufacture of the six ships. All ships are now in production following the cutting of steel for the sixth ship in January 2007. The third ship (HMS Diamond) was launched November 2007 and the fourth ship (HMS Dragon) is scheduled for launch in November 2008. The First of Class (HMS Daring) has successfully completed sea trials in August 2007, with further sea trials planned in April 2008. HMS Daring Acceptance off Contract is targeted for December 2008, with an approved In-Service Date of November 2010. 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>BAE Surface Fleet Solutions (BAE Systems Electronics Ltd Farnborough)</td>
<td>Full development and production</td>
<td>Target Cost Incentive Fee Shareline</td>
<td>Single source</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>EURO Principal AntiAir Missile System</td>
<td>Full scale engineering development and initial production including missiles for initial use.</td>
<td>Fixed price</td>
<td>Collaborative with France and Italy</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>EURO Principal AntiAir Missile System</td>
<td>Follow-on ships production</td>
<td>Fixed price for five follow-on equipments</td>
<td>Collaborative with France and Italy</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>EUROSAM &amp; UKAMS<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
<td>
Production of missiles
</td>
<td>Fixed price</td>
<td>Collaborative with France and Italy through Organisation Conjointe de Coopération en matière d'ARmement</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">UKAMS is a wholly owned company of MBDA<a href="fnref1"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
6464
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
5475
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+989
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-49</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>As a direct result of a move of ship build from Barrow to Clyde, in line with Maritime Industrial Strategy principles, there has been an increase in overheads for the ‘Six Ship Proposal’ price that is not directly attributable to this project (-£78m). Reduction in cost of capital (-£9m) due to lower than expected cash expenditure in 2005/06 (closing accrual higher than estimated). Transfer to Maritime Training Systems Integrated Project Team (-£35m) and associated Cost of Capital (-£1m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£24m). Adjustment to previous years Cost of Capital figures due to system error (+£98m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-38</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>EP07 savings measure to reduce the quantity of Principal Anti-Air Missile System missiles (-£30m). A combination of Equipment Plan Options plus internal adjustments, and Cost of Capital. The Options were: re-profiling of the contract for demonstration and manufacture (approved sixship programme); re-profiling of the (planned) twelve ship programme; reducing the scope of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System missile buy and costs of shipbuilders’
premium (+£91m). Increases to the Principal Anti-Air Missile System contract and additional funding and increases in delay and dislocation money (+£177m). Incremental</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Acquisition Programme reprofiling and Incremental Acquisition Programme upgrade deleted (-£238m). Equipment Plan Options re-profiling costs for ships five and six and deferring ships seven and eight (+£2m) and the associated Cost of Capital (+£12m). Correction to forecast:
costs wrongly attributed to ships seven &amp; eight (+£26m). Principal Anti-Air Missile System increased cost of Longbow mooring (+£4m). Cost of Capital associated with estimated cost growth of ship Batch 2 reported at MPR04 (+£54m). Cost of Capital relating to Principal Anti-Air Missile System increased cost (exchange rate) and re-profiling (+£10m). Savings in ships capability (performance) to bring costs back to EP05 baseline; Combat Systems risk provision (-£60m), Whole Life Support (support solution study) (-£21m) and Incremental Acquisition Programme (-£64m). Revised estimate of Westinghouse RollsRoyce 21 engine concept/assessment phase (-£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+1460
</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Estimated increase in ship build cost based on an assessment of the 'Six Ship Proposal' price from the Prime Contractor (+£462m). Estimated increase in ship build cost (+£184m) and associated cost of capital (+£18m). Costs omitted from EP05 and MPR05 relating to increase in ship build cost (+£52m) and associated cost of capital (+£5m). Higher than expected costs for Principal AntiAir Missile System Production Equipment (+£124m). Corrections to Warship costs (+£13m). Expected increase in costs of elements of batch two ships which are yet to be negotiated (+£250m). Corrections and adjustments to forecast costs (+£97m). Principal Anti-Air Missile System missiles</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>re-instated (+£173m). Increase in Cost of Capital due to corrections to Principal Anti-Air Missile System (+£82m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+55</td>
<td>Exchange Rate</td>
<td>Pound to Euro rate worse than originally forecast (+£47m). Principal Anti-Air Missile System exchange rate (impact of rate at EP05) (+£8m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+36</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Issues arising from migrating from Skynet 4 to Skynet 5 and to implement system growth (+£3m). Increase in Cost of Capital resulting from ISD slippage (+£33m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-475</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (90%) estimates at Main Gate (-£506m). Increase in risk due to re-calculation of Cost of Capital (+£31m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+989</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
4117
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2003/2004
</td>
<td>
2004/2005
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>582</td>
<td>
649
</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>
6
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
The date to which the First of Class will meet the Customer's minimum operational requirement.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
November 2010
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
November 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+36
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+24</td>
<td>Procurement Strategy</td>
<td>Longer than expected design phase plus an acknowledgement that a number of other factors which had impacted earlier in the programme had injected unrecoverable delay. These factors were principally related to delays in agreeing the original industrial strategy; problems associated with managing parallel and dependant development programmes and a better understanding of the programme to deliver ISD. (MPR02 +6 months; MPR04 +18 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+18</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Latest Timescale Risk Analysis founded on data from Six Ship Proposal from BAE Systems (+11 months). Refinement of timescale risk analysis shows that there are a number of opportunities in the programme which support a most likely date of December 2009. Principal among these is the opportunity for parallel working that is not yet fully exploited within industry’s plan and the potential to use the second ship to demonstrate elements of First of Class capability (-1 month). Impact of slippage to SAMPSON programme and measures taken to mitigate the full impact of that delay (+3 months). Assessment based on full</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Date
</td>
<td>
Variation (months)
</td>
<td>
Factor
</td>
<td>
Explanation
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>timescale risk analysis (conducted jointly with BAE Systems) which gave a most likely date of March 2010, based on baseline programme. Agreement reached with company and Customer 1, however, on how Stage 2 trials programme can be de-scoped thereby giving a Most Likely date of October 2009 (+ 2 months). Latest assessment based on timescale risk analysis of most up to date programme reflecting descoping of trials programme (+3 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-6
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (90%) estimate at Main Gate (-6 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
+36
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>
Cost £m
</th>
<th>
Saving £m
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+2
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
Additional maintenance periods required to run-on Type 42 Destroyer for 11 months<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+1
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
Additional maintenance periods required to run-on Type 42 Destroyer for 7 months.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
+196
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
Additional Type 42 run-on costs due to Type 45 slippage.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Total
</td>
<td>
+199
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Relates to slippage in ISD of Type 45 First of Class only, to align with the definition of ISD at Section 3a.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

Delay in ISD further extends the period before a capability to defeat multiple attacks by seaskimming missiles will be available, as well as the capability for Royal Navy escorts to provide tactical control of combat aircraft.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>KUR Serial</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Forecast to be Met</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>Not to be Met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>01</td>
<td>
Principal Anti-Air Missile System. The Type 45 shall be able to protect with a Probability of Escaping Hit of {x}
all units operating within a radius of 6.5km, against up to 8 supersonic sea skimming missiles arriving randomly within {y} seconds.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>02</td>
<td>
Force Anti-Air Warfare Situational Awareness. The Type 45 shall be able to assess the Air Warfare Tactical Situation of 1000 air real world objects against a total arrival and/or departure rate of 500 air real world objects per hour.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>03</td>
<td>
Aircraft Control. The Type 45 shall be able to provide close tactical control to at least 4 fixed wing aircraft, or 4 groups of aircraft in single speaking units, assigned to the force.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>04</td>
<td>
Aircraft Operation. The Type 45 shall be able to operate both one organic Merlin (AntiSubmarine Warfare and Utility variants) and one organic Lynx Mk8 helicopter, although not simultaneously.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>05</td>
<td>
Embarked Military Force. The Type 45 shall be able to operate an Embarked Military Force of at least 30 deployable troops.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>06</td>
<td>
Naval Diplomacy. The Type 45 shall be able to coerce potential adversaries into compliance with the wishes of Her Majesty's Government or the wider international community through the presence of a Medium Calibre Gun System of at least 114mm.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>07</td>
<td>
Range. The Type 45 shall be able to transit at least 3000 nautical miles to its assigned mission, operate for 3 days and return to point of origin, unsupported throughout, within 20 days.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>08</td>
<td>
Growth Potential. The Type 45 capability shall be able to be upgraded to incorporate new capabilities or to enhance extant capabilities through displacement Margins of at least 11.5%.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>09</td>
<td>
Availability. The Type 45 shall have a 70%
availability to contribute to Maritime Operations over a period of at least 25 years, of which at least 35% shall be spent at sea.
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage currently forecast to be met</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>August 2007</td>
<td>KUR 2</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>When MPR07 was compiled the extant version of Combat Management System software had insufficient capability to fully satisfy Key User Requirements 2 and 3. The decision was made during MPR08 reporting period to upgrade the Combat Management System software, which increased functionality and fully satisfied Key User Requirements 2 and 3.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>August 2007</td>
<td>KUR 3</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>When MPR07 was compiled the extant version of Combat Management System software had insufficient capability to fully satisfy Key User Requirements 2 and 3. The decision was made during MPR08 reporting period to upgrade the Combat Management System software, which increased functionality and fully satisfied Key User Requirements 2 and 3.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 02</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Revised programme to achieve earliest possible ISD leads to a lower level of Combat Management System functionality at ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 03</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Revised programme to achieve earliest possible ISD leads to a lower level of Combat Management System functionality at ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 04</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Integrated Project Team &amp; Director of Equipment Capability agreed to conduct "First of Class Flying Trials" with a Merlin. This will remove the expectation that at ISD only Lynx capability will have been demonstrated. Ability to operate Lynx but not Merlin will be demonstrated by Full Operating Capability ISD. Merlin will be demonstrated beyond ISD</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The Type 45 Destroyer programme builds on the Assessment work carried out in Phase 1 of the collaborative HORIZON project, the warship element of the Common New Generation Frigate programme. Following the decision of the three HORIZON partners (France, Italy and the United Kingdom) to proceed with Principal Anti-Air Missile System, but to pursue national warship programmes, BAE Systems was appointed Prime Contractor for the Type 45 in November 1999. The contract for Principal Anti-Air Missile System Full Scale Engineering Development and Initial Production was placed in August 1999. Main Gate approval for the warship was achieved in July 2000 and a contract for Demonstration and First of Class Manufacture was placed in December 2000.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase^\^

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 232                       | 3.5%                                                      |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 213                       | 3.2%                                                      |
| Variation                     | +19                       |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 2000
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 1991<sup>†</sup>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
108<sup>‡</sup>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>5000</td>
<td>5475</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>7689</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

^\^ The Assessment Phase costs approved at Initial Gate did not take into account that all expenditure on the Westinghouse Rolls-Royce 21 engine was to be treated as Assessment Costs rather than Manufacturing Costs.

1.  Type 45 Destroyer is a legacy project that drew upon the concept work of Project Horizon and Future Frigate. Type 45 did not formally go through Initial Gate, but for MPR2000, the NAO agreed that EP11/91 should be equated as Initial Gate for Type 45.

2.  This aligns with the derived date for Initial Gate above. Type 45 is a legacy project building on the Assessment work carried out in phase 1 of the collaborative Horizon Project..

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>May 2007</td>
<td>
November 2007
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
December 2002
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK

[^1]: The Type 45 is a planned class of eight ships. Approval has, so far, only been given for six ships. It is on the Approval of six ships that the Major Projects Report is presented.
