---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Page_from: 118.0
Page_to: 127.0
Project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_118_127.md
---
<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Military Afloat Reach Sustainability
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commercially Supported Shipping
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Brigadier John Brittain
</Td>
<td>march 2011</Td>
<td>november 2012</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore William Walworth
</Td>
<td>november 2012</Td>
<td>september 2013</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore Robert Dorey
</Td>
<td>september 2013</Td>
<td>september 2018</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Fleet Solid Support Ships
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Provide Afloat Logistic Support to UK and Allied Maritime Task Groups at Sea and their Amphibious Components Operating Ashore. Although not Strictly a One-for-One Replacement Programme, the New Tankers will Incrementally Replace Most of the Existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary Single-Hull Tanker Flotilla.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability is Designed to Support Three Distinct Types of Maritime Task Group: Carrier Strike, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Security. the Demands of Each Differ Significantly, but are all Composed of Three Common Elements:

Bulk Consumables - Fuel and Potable Water which are Transferred by Hose.

Non-Bulk Consumables - Food, Ammunition and General Stores. Solid Cargo which is Transferred in Unit Loads, Either Ship to Ship or Ship to Shore.

Forward Aviation Support - The Provision of Helicopter Basing and Operating Facilities to Accommodate some of the Task Group’s Aircraft or to Provide Operational Flexibility During a Campaign.

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Capability will be in Service into the 2050s and will be Designed to Accommodate the Requirements of Current and Known Future Force Structures, Including Type 45, the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers, Lightning II and Type 26 Global Combat Ship. Tankers will Provide Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group. Solid Support Ships, Previously Referred to as Fleet Solid Support and Amphibious Combat Stores Ship, will Provide Non Bulk Consumables and Forward Aviation Support to the Maritime Task Group.

The Capability to be Provided is Essential to the Evolving Logistic Support Needs of the Royal Navy. the Proposed Procurement Profile of Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Ships Has Been Matched to this

Need with Initial Focus on the Double-Hulled Tankers which are Required in Order to Comply with International Maritime Legislation.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme Received Formal Approval to Enter Its Assessment

Phase in July 2005 Based on an Alliance Strategy. Following a Review of the Procurement Strategy in 2007, the Alliance Strategy Was Terminated. a New Strategy, Based on a ‘competitive and Adaptive’ Approach, Was Approved and Reflected the Need to Procure the Tanker Element of the Programme Separately in Order to Comply with International Maritime Legislation. in Addition Approval Was Granted for the Designation and Delegation of the Heavy Replenishment at Sea Project as a Separate Category D Project. Solid Support Ships will Now Form a Separate Strategy. an Open International Competition Was Launched for the Design and Build of Up to Six Fleet Tankers but Was Cancelled Following the Department's Examination of Its Equipment Programme in 2008. a Review of the Requirements and Procurement Strategy Was Undertaken which Concluded that a more Open Procurement Strategy to Consider a Range of Possible Solutions and which Take Account of the Market Conditions Was more Likely to Secure Best Value for Money for the MOD. a New International Competition for Up to Six Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers Was Launched in October 2009 which Was Conducted using the Competitive Dialogue Process.

Subsequently the Requirement Was Reduced from Six Ships to Four as a Result of the Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010.

Following Assessment of Initial Pre Qualification Questionnaires Six Companies Were Invited to Proceed to the Next Stage of the Competition. the Competition Was Conducted over Three Stages Stage 1 - Invitation to Submit Outline Solutions Took Place over March to September 2010. Stage 2 - Invitation to Submit Detailed Solutions Commenced in October 2010 and Continued Through to Invitation to Submit Final Bids in October 2011 which Was Issued to Three Companies; Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (Republic of Korea), Fincantieri (Italy), Hyundai Heavy Industries (Republic of Korea). Three Companies Withdrew Earlier in the Competition; Flensburger Schiffbau-Gesellschaft (Germany); Knutsen OAS Ltd in June 2011 and A&P Group Ltd in August 2011.

The Current Approved Budget for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Assessment Phase is £44m and the Current Forecast for the Assessment Phase £17m. Following the Department’s Annual Planning Round 2012 the Fleet Solid Support Element of the Programme Was Considered a Non Core Equipment Programme and will Require Departmental Review Before Further Work is Undertaken and Therefore No Further Forecast Assessment Phase Expenditure is Included. the Tanker Element of the Programme Passed Through Main Gate in 2011.

## A.3. Project History

The Main Gate Business Case for the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tankers Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Committee in October 2011. the Performance Cost and Time Envelope Put Forward at that Time Was Based on Available Indicative Information the Approval of which Enabled the Department to Proceed to the Final Bid Stage of the Competition. Further Departmental and HM Treasury Approval to Proceed to Contract Award Was Received in January 2012 and Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Was Named as the Preferred Bidder in February 2012. the Contract Was Placed in March 2012.

In Accordance with the Department's Approvals Process the Final Performance Cost and Time Was Approved in December 2012 Providing the Project's Baseline. in June 2012 Her Majesty the Queen Approved the Names of the Tankers Confirmed to be RFA TIDESPRING, RFA TIDERACE, RFA TIDESURGE, RFA TIDEFORCE. the Preliminary Design Review Was Completed in July 2012.

Completion of Design Transition from Basic Design Phase to Detailed Design Phase in June 2013. Award and Commencement of Build Oversight and Surveillance Contract to SeaQuest Marine Project

Management Ltd in August 2013. Before Entering Service the Ships will Require Customisation in the UK and will Undergo Further Trials; an Advert Was Placed in the Defence Contracts Bulletin for the UK Customisation, Capability Assessment Trials and Support Contract in December 2013.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Critical Design Review Was Completed in Jun 2014, and Construction of the First Ship of the Class RFA

TIDESPRING Commenced in that Month. Keel Laying of the First and Steel Cut of the Second, RFA

TIDERACE, Was Achieved in December 2014. RFA TIDESPRING Was Launched During a Float Out from

Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering‘s No 2 Dock in April 2015. Whilst Work to Complete the

Integrated Logistic Support Outputs Continues, Outstanding Items from the Initial Deliverables Provided in December 2014 are Being Addressed Through a Revised Programme and are not Expected to Impact on Platform Delivery.

Following Competition, A&P Group in Falmouth Was Awarded the UK Customisation, Capability

Assessment Trials and Support Contract in January 2015, in Order to Complete Customisation of Sensitive Elements and Undertake Final Military Trials in the UK. A&P are also on Contract to Provide Initial in-Service Support to June 2018.

## A.5. Capability Risks

The Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme will Deliver Future Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships, Replacing the Current Capability, to Support the Future Royal Navy. Without the Support of These Ships, the Ability of the Royal Navy to Carry Out Global Operations will be Severely Restricted. Double Hulled Naval Tankers are Required as Soon as is Practicable to Comply with International Maritime Legislation; the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Currently Operates Two Double Hulled Tankers and Four Single Hulled Tankers under Exemption from Legislation. the Number of Ships with Single Hulled Tanks Was Reduced from Six to Four in 2011 as a Result of the Strategic Defence and Security Review. All Royal Fleet Auxiliary Ships are Maintained to UK Regulatory and Classifications Standards; Should this Certification and Classification be Withdrawn for Single Hulled Tankers, their Operation Would Cease Immediately Leading to Severe Operational Limitations on the Ability of the Royal Navy to Operate Worldwide and in Anything but the Most Benign Environments. Foreign Nations Have Already Begun to Deny Port Access for Single Hulled Tankers and this Situation will be Exacerbated as a Consequence of any Environmental Incident, MOD Shipping Related or Not. Programming for Operations Takes Account of Environmental Restrictions as Well as Limitations on Ships Due to their Material State; for Example some of the Older Ships are Unable to Operate in Colder Climates Due to their Steel Grade which is Potentially Susceptible to Brittle Fracture. These Ships will be Replaced as the Double Hulled Tanker Element of the Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Programme is Delivered.

## A.6. Associated Projects – N/a

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>
Contract Type
</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker Main Build</Td>
<td>daewoo Shipbuilding and

Marine Engineering
</Td>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker UK Customisation and Capability Assessment Trials</Td>
<td>a&amp;p Group</Td>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>firm Price</Td>
<td>competitive –
Restricted to UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">the Contract with Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Includes Two Years Initial Provisioning Including Spares and Training for Each of the Ships. the Subsequent in Service Support will be Subject to Competition.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker Support</Td>
<td>a&amp;p Group</Td>
<td>initial in-Service Support</Td>
<td>firm Rates</Td>
<td>competitive –
Restricted to UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>-27</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>44</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>-27</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name                      | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker | \-                       | 596                   | \-                        |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>596</Td>
<td>552</Td>
<td>-44</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>596</Td>
<td>552</Td>
<td>-44</Td>
<td>-10</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker (in-Year)

Date

Variation (£m)

Category

Reason for Variation

Mar-15

-1

Technical Factors

Reduction in Government

Furnished Equipment and First

Outfit Costs

Feb

\-

15

+1

Technical Factors

Advancement of Ship 2 Keel Lay

Jan-15

-10

Technical Factors

Contract Award of UK

Cus

Tomisation and Trials Element

Net Variation (£m)

-

10

### B.3.1.1.1 Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker (Historic)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 30%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>mpr</Th>
<th>annual Variation (£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Variation by Category (£m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 14
</Td>
<td>
-34
</Td>
<td>
-34
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
MPR 13
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
-35
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration &
Manufacture Phase - N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>mars Tanker Interim InService Support</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td>
19
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.4.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Support / PFI Cost (in Year) –
N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>17</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>17</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>122</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>138</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>220</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

The Forecast Cost of the Assessment Phase Reflects the Expenditure Up to the Main Investment Decision for Military Afloat Reach & Sustainability Tankers and Does not Include any Further Expenditure on the Fleet Solid Support Ships, which are not Currently in the Core Equipment Programme.

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main

Investment

Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability</Td>
<td>
July 2005
</Td>
<td>
January 2012
</Td>
<td>
78
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
October 2016
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>
The Date when the Sponsor Accepts the MARS Tanker as Being Operationally Capable to Its Fullest Extent; or the Date when the Sponsor Agrees with the User that the MARS Tanker Has Achieved Operational Capability in an Agreed Minimum Effective Deployable Form.
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>variation (+/-Months)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>october 2016</Td>
<td>october 2016</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker – N/a

## C.3.4 Other Costs Resulting from Timescale Variation – N/a

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
<col Style="Width: 36%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Progress to Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker</Td>
<td>declared when all Ships of Class are Accepted into Service</Td>
<td>
On Track
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

| Current Score | Comments                          |
|-------------------|---------------------------------------|
| 82                | Score Represents a Green/Amber Status |

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>
Design and Manufacture Phases of MARS Tanker to the Point of Declaring Acceptance into Service
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>
Establishment of a Timely Training Plan to Support MARS Tanker Within the Directed Resources.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>
Through-Life Support Plan and Integrated Logistics Support Plan.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>
Readiness of UK and Overseas Port and Shoreside Infrastructure.
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>
Timely Establishment of Front Line Command Manpower.
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>
Doctrinal Direction Underpins Safe and Effective Introduction into Service
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>
Policy Underpins Safe and Effective Introduction into Service
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>
Fully Accredited Command Control Communication Computer Information. Systems
</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>31/03/2015</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>design and Manufacture of MARS Tankers. There is a Risk of Additional Unforeseen Issues Arising During Build and Acceptance, Exacerbated by an Overseas Build and Additional Complexities in Completing Production.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>design and Manufacture of MARS Tankers. There is Risk in the Transition from Outline Design to Detailed Design Work Owing to Tight Timescale and Overseas Build Option. if Realised this Risk Could Cause a Cost or Time Overrun.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ongoing / Current</Th>
<th>training</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>establishment of a Timely Training Plan to Support MARS Tanker Within the Dedicated Resources. There is a Risk that a Sufficiently Robust Training Plan is not Developed in Time to Support the Inservice Date of the Early Vessels, Due to the Delay in Completion of Integrated Logistics Support Tasks (Training Needs Analysis).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>ongoing / Current</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>through Life Support Plan and Integrated Logistics Support Solution. There is a Risk that the Through Life Support Plan will not be Developed, to Provide Anticipated Through Life Savings. This is Due to Weakness in the Integrated Logistics Support Package Currently Being Addressed.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>ongoing / Current</Td>
<td>personnel</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>timely Establishment of Front Line Command Manpower. There is a Risk that Insufficient Suitably Qualified Manpower will be Available to Accept Delivery and Support Manning of the Vessels. This is Due to a General Shortfall in Royal Fleet Auxiliary Recruitment Numbers and Unforecast Levels of Outflow Together with Uncertainty in the Training Burden</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

## D.3.1 Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability Tanker

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM)

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 13%" />
<col Style="Width: 38%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kpm</Th>
<th>dlod</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>cargo Capacity. the Platform Shall Store 19000<sup>m3</Sup> of Useable Class II Fuel.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>cargo Embarkation. the Platform Shall Embark Cargo Bulk Logistics Materiel in Accordance with Oil Companies International Marine Forum Publication Recommendations for Oil Tanker Manifolds and Associated Equipment 4th Edition 1991</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Equipment
</Td>
<td>replenishment at Sea Capability. the Platform Shall Deliver Bulk Logistics Materiel Whilst Underway and Making Way at 12 Knots Through the Water.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>replenishment Tempo. the Platform Shall Deliver Bulk Logistics Material to 3 Exchange Points Concurrently.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>platform Speed. the Platform Shall Propel Itself at an Upper Sustained Speed of 15 Knots</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>platform Endurance. the Platform Shall Have an Endurance of 7000 Nautical Miles at a Sustained Speed of 15 Knots</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>platform Equipment Performance. the Platform Shall Deliver Core MARS Tanker Platform Functions in Sea Temperatures Up to 38°c.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>survivability. the Platform Shall Enable Above Water Warfare Self Defence.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>9</Td>
<td>
Information
</Td>
<td>computer Information Systems Interoperability. the Platform Shall Exchange Information in Accordance with MoD CIS Policy as Recorded in the JSP 600 Series of Directions.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>10</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>physical Interoperability. the MARS System Shall Provide Logistics Sustainment to UK/US and NATO Military Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>11</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>aviation. the Platform Shall Conduct the Launch and Recovery of Rotorcraft (Aircraft Types Merlin Mk1 or Mk2, Wildcat &amp;
Chinook).</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">currently Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>11</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>11 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation – N/a

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a
