---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
Page_from: 156.0
Page_to: 163.0
Project_label: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_156_163.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
RAdm Alex Burton
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>september 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Type 26 Global Combat Ship
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

There is a Need to Replace the 13 Ship Type 23 Capability Before the Safe Operating Standard for Legacy Ships is Withdrawn and the Platforms Become Obsolete. Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review it Was Confirmed that this Enduring Requirement will be Delivered by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship.

Type 26 Global Combat Ship (T26 GCS) is Currently Assumed to be a Single Class of 13 Ships.

The T26 GCS will be a Multi-Mission Warship Designed for Joint and Multinational Operations Across the Full Spectrum of Warfare, Including Complex Combat Operations, Counter Piracy, Humanitarian and Disaster Relief Work. It will be Capable of Operating Independently for Significant Periods, or as Part of a Task Group. on Current Plans, all Type 26 Global Combat Ships will Have the Same Base Level of Capability but Equipment Fits Tailored to Task will Enable Them to Meet their Specific Operational Requirements.

\\\ the Current Planning Assumption is to Replace Type 23 under the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Programme, Based on One Class of 13 Ships Delivered in Two Variants; Anti Submarine Warfare and General Purpose Vessels.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

2006: The Sustained Surface Combatant Capability Pathfinder Project in 2006 Recommended a Threeclass Solution; C1, a Task-Group Enabled Anti-Submarine Warfare Frigate; C2, a General Purpose Frigate; C3, Providing Mine Countermeasure, Hydrographic and Patrol Capabilities. the Sustained Surface Combatant Capability Project Highlighted a Need for Up to Ten (C1) and Eight C2s. Type 26 (C1) Was to be Built First at a Rate of One per Year, Followed by C2. This Approach also Met the Needs of Industrial Sustainability Whilst Fulfilling the Royal Navy Requirement.

2009: The Approval from the Investment Approvals Board Capped the
“not to Exceed” Value of the

Assessment Phase at the 50% Level. All Non-UK New Design and Build Options Were Discounted at the Initial Gate, as Recorded in the Investment Appraisal, Noting the over-Arching Agreement with BAE Systems Maritime – Naval Ships in the Terms of Business Agreement (TOBA) (Dated 21 July 2009).

2010: It Was on this Basis that the Concept Phase Progressed to the Initial Gate Approval for Future Surface Combatant (C1) on 18 March 2010. It Was Anticipated that Main Gate Approval Would be Sought by the Middle of the Decade and Estimated that for a Ten Ship Class the Procurement Cost Would be \\\ (Inclusive of VAT and Inflation), with a Whole Life Cost of \\\ (Inclusive of VAT and Inflation), Assuming a Ship Life of 25 Years. It Was also Recognised that There Would be a Strategic Defence and Security Review Following the 2015 General Election. Subsequently as Part of the Approval, it Was Planned that There Would be a Mid-Phase Review Point to Assess the Impact of any Changes in Policy Driven by that Review. in October 2010 the Strategic Defence and Security Review Reduced the Total Surface Fleet to 19 Frigates and Destroyers which will Include Six Type 45 Destroyers and the Current Type 23 Frigates which will be Replaced by the Newly Renamed Type 26 Global Combat Ship (Previously Future Surface Combatants) after 2020. the Strategic Defence and Security Review also Merged the C1 and C2 Variants into a Single Class of 13 Ships.

Subject to Approvals and Value for Money Assessments, Type 26 Global Combat Ships are Expected to be Procured on a Single Source Basis from BAE Systems Maritime - Naval Ships. \\\.

2011: The Alignment of Renamed Type 26 Global Combat Ship Against the Goals of the Strategic Defence and Security Review Was Confirmed in an Information Note Submitted to the Investment Approvals Board in January 2011. This Information Note Stated That:

1.  Approval will be Split into Two Parts. Approval (Main Gate 1) will Seek Endorsement of the Requirements to be Delivered by Type 26 Global Combat Ship with Main Gate 2, the Main Investment Decision, Following at the End of the Assessment Phase.

2.  the Remaining Programme Key Milestones Remain Unchanged, with Planned Assumption for Service Entry as Soon as Possible after 2020;

3.  Type 26 Global Combat Ship Design is Considered to Have Export Potential with Considerable Effort Being Expended to Encourage Overseas Partner Interest.

2011: The Design and Study Work for the Analysis of Options Stage Concluded in the Capability Decision Point, Held in November 2011. This Identified a Baseline Design from which more Detailed Design Work Continued During the Remainder of the Assessment Phase. the Capability Decision Point Informed the Main Gate 1 Submission which Has Been Endorsed by the MOD Investment Approvals Committee. Main Gate 1 Provided Approval for the Project Team to Continue the Assessment Phase with the Detailed Design Work on the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Capability Architecture, Down Selected on the Basis of the Capability Decision Point Output; and for the Support Solution to Enter Its Assessment Phase.

\\\.

2012: The Detailed Design Phase and Industry Engagement Process Was Planned to Underpin the Programme’s Main Gate 2 at the End of the Assessment Phase, which Was Intended to Conclude at the End of 2014, Allowing the Production Phase to Begin Immediately Thereafter. \\\

Maritime Indirect Fires System Was Brought under the Programme Umbrella, and Its Main Gate Approval will be Integrated into the Type 26 Main Gate 2 Submission. Maritime Indirect Fires System is an Open Competition Led by the MOD for a Medium Calibre Gun System and which Passed Its Own Initial Gate in September 2012. the Invitation to Negotiate Was Issued in March 2013 to Companies Who Successfully Completed the Pre-Qualification Questionnaire. \\\

2013: The MOD Has Engaged in a Series of Negotiations with BAE Systems to Determine the Best Approach to Maintain the Key Industrial Skills Needed to Sustain UK Shipbuilding - The Maritime Composite Option. \\\

A Review Note Was Submitted in July 2013 when the Project Sought Permission to Extend the Assessment Phase from December 2013 Through to July 2014 and Reported that the December 2012 Affordability Challenge Had Been Reduced \\\. the Review Note also Sought Approval to Fund some Initial Stage Work to Scope a Proposed Modern Dock Hall which Aimed to Deliver an Optimised, Efficient Build at Lower Overall Cost and to Underpin Transformation Within BAES.

The Assessment Phase Extension Was Necessary as a Result of \\\ and the yet to be Concluded Maritime Composite Option Negotiations. Extension Enabled the Design to be Further Matured Ahead of the Main Investment Decision.

At the Defence Security and Equipment International Exhibition in September 2013, BAE Systems Released New Images of the Current Type 26 Global Combat Ship Design and Announced the First 4 Equipment Down-Selections: Gas Turbines (Rolls Royce) Gearbox (David Brown Gear Systems Ltd), Diesel Generators (MTU) and Integrated Digital Communications Systems (Rohde Schwarz).

Approval to Extend the Assessment Phase Was Granted in Early October 2013 but the Investment Approvals Committee Did not Initially Approve the Funding for the Modern Dock Hall Element Due to the Outstanding Resolution of the Maritime Composite Option Negotiations.

On 6 November 2013, the Secretary of State Announced in Parliament that the Maritime Composite Option Negotiations Had Concluded and Confirmed in His Statement that Three Offshore Patrol Vessels Would be Built for the Royal Navy. the Construction of These Vessels Would Ensure the Key Industrial Skills Were Maintained Between the Conclusion of the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers and the Start of Construction of the First Type 26 Global Combat Ship. as a Result of the Conclusion of the Maritime Composite Option Negotiations, the Approval for the Initial Scoping of a Modern Dock Hall Option Was Subsequently Granted in Late November 2013.

2014: In May 2014, a Further Review Note Was Submitted to the Investment Approvals Committee to Extend the Assessment Phase to December 2014 which Stems from the Need for the Department to Achieve the Most Mature Case Practicable Given the Significance of the Investment. This Was Approved on 4 June 2014.

In September 2014, a Further 3 Month Extension Was Requested for the Assessment Phase to Allow the Project to Achieve Approval of a Review Note and Associated Contract to be Placed for a New Demonstration Phase. This Was Approved by Ministers in December 14. the Assessment Phase Concluded on 31 March 2015.

## A.3. in-Year Progress

August 2014: The MOD Implemented a Revised Incremental Approach to Approvals and Commitment on the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Programme, with Separate Approvals Covering the Demonstration Phase, Shipbuilding Facilities Investment and the Manufacture Phase. This Approach Draws on Key Lessons from the Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carrier Programme. It will Ensure that the Ship Design is Sufficiently Mature, the Supply Chain is Fully Mobilised Early in the Programme, and a Full Joint Analysis of Programme Risk is Completed Before Awarding Contract(s) to Build the Ships.

Rigorous Analysis is Now Re-Setting the Schedule, Cost Base and Risk Position to Arrive at a Robust Realistic Proposal for Main Gate 2.

January 2015: A Review Note Was Submitted in January 2015 to Approve the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Project Proceeding to the Demonstration Phase, Covering the Period 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016.

February 2015: The IAC Approved the Advancement to the Demonstration Phase on 20 February 15 and the Prime Minister Made a Public Announcement of the £859m Contract. the 12 Month Demonstration Phase Covers the Continued Progression of the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Project Including Investment in Essential Long Lead Items, Shore Testing Facilities and the Analysis of the Potential Shipbuilding Facility Investment Options for Type 26 Global Combat Ship. the Contract also Commits to Key Initial Equipment for the First 3 Type 26 Global Combat Ship Vessels (Extending Beyond 12 Months) Providing Certainty to UK Suppliers; the Demonstration Phase Sustains Momentum on the Programme as Well as Enabling Time to Demonstrate a Robust Proposal and Readiness for Manufacture, and as a Result of Careful Negotiations, the MOD Has Secured Savings and the Best Possible Deal to Ensure that this is a Good Investment for the Taxpayer.

## A.4. Capability Risks

The Strategic Defence and Security Review Confirmed the Need for Future Force 2020 to Provide Maritime Defence of the UK and Its South Atlantic Overseas Territories. Capabilities Should Include a Surface Fleet of 19 Frigates and Destroyers Providing Military Flexibility Across a Variety of Operations, Including Six Type 45 Destroyers and the Current Type 23 Frigates. However There is a Need to Replace the Type 23 Surface Combatant Capability Before the Safe Operating Standard for Legacy Ships is Withdrawn and the Platforms Become Obsolete.

\\\ There is No Scope to Extend the Current Type 23 Platforms Further without Extensive, Currently Unaffordable Modifications. if Further Extension Was Required, the Hull Strength, Stability and Legislative Safety Compliance Would Need to be Addressed by Work that Removes Capability, Does not Reduce the Risk to the Generation of Forces at Readiness and Costs more than a New Build, Incurring Significant Additional Cost for a Limited Time Extension of the Class (Between 1 and 3 Years). Individual Platform Availability at this End of the Reliability Curve is Likely to be Low and with Restricted Endurance (Because of Fuel Liquid Load Restrictions) their Warfighting Utility will be Limited. the Strategic Defence and Security Review Confirmed that as Soon as Possible after 2020 the Type 23 Frigates will be Replaced by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship which will be Designed to be Easily Adapted to Change Roles and Capabilities Depending on the Strategic Circumstances.

## A.5. Associated Projects

| Project/Increment Name | Forecast in Service Date / Initial Operating Capability | Approval Status |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------|----------------|
| \\\                     | \\\                                                      | \\\              |
| \\\                     | \\\                                                      | \\\              |

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision Project /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project / Increment Name</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">the Type 26 Global Combat Ship Support Strategy Has Undergone a Number of Changes over the Reporting Period Following a Review of the Maritime Enterprise by Chief of Materiel (Fleet). This Review Identified that the Optimal Strategy for Support to the Surface Fleet Was to Develop a Common Support Model (CSM), Including the Current in Service Fleet, the Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers, Type 45 Destroyers Phase 2 and Type 26 Global Combat Ship. This Approach Was Taken to the Investment Approvals Committee in October 2014 and Subsequently Approved, and is Being Led by the Surface Ship Support Programme Team, with Input from the Type 26 Project. the T26 Global Combat Ship Demonstration Phase Includes Funding for the Development of Integrated Logistics Support Products, Design for Support (DfS), Support Solution Development for in Service, Maturation of the Support Elements of the Joint Cost Model and Management of the Support Programme. Current Assumptions are that this Work will Allow the Main Gate 2 Approval to Contain all Support Related Activities Within the Manufacture Phase so Delivering Royal Navy a Capability that is Aligned to the Navy Command Key Support Principles Ready for in Service. the Manufacture Phase will Provide Initial Support for Each Ship until Vessel Acceptance Date (VAD), Including Support to the Trials and Commissioning Programme and to Shore Based Test Facilities. the Scope and Cost for that in Service Support will be Matured During the Manufacture Phase and Approval will be Sought at a Support Main Gate, Most Likely in 2019.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Service Support Contract for Type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>bae Systems</Td>
<td>initial Support</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| Project/Increment Name | Approved Cost (£m) | Forecast Cost (£m) | Variation (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Type 26 Global Combat Ship | 158                    | 339                    | 181                |
| Total (£m)             | 158                | 339                | 181            |

The Cost Growth to the Assessment Phase is Due to the Transfer of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Funding as a Result of Detailed Design Activities Being Brought Forward which Results in No Overall Programme Cost Increase.

The Type 26 Global Combat Ship Has Only Recently Entered into the Demonstration Phase from the Assessment Phase with Investigations into the Cost of Delivering the Capability Being Assessed. as Such, it Would not be Appropriate at this Time to Disclose the Immature Costs of Type 26.

To Note: The Figures Shown Within Sections B2 & B3 – ‘cost Boundaries for Demonstration and

Manufacture Phase / PFI’ Differ from MPR2014, as the Programme Has Transitioned Through to

Demonstration Phase, and Has Ceased using the Figures Forecast from the Initial Gate Business Case, and are using Actual ‘budgeted For’ Costs. the Figures Against the ‘manufacture Phase (Long Lead Items) ‘budgeted For’ and ‘forecast Costs’ are of One Element Only of the Demonstration Phase Contract Agreeing to Purchase Long Lead Items for the First 3 Ships.

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name | Lowest Forecast (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Forecast (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Type 26 Global Combat Ship | 0                        | \\\                | 0                         |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>demonstration Phase</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>manufacture Phase (Inc. Long Lead Items</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Demonstration Phase – N/a

## B.3.2 – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost – N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>173</Td>
<td>167</Td>
<td>340</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>manufacture Phase (Inc. Long Lead Items)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>3</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>173</Td>
<td>171</Td>
<td>343</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>forecast Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment

Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>march 2015</Td>
<td>60</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Forecast</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>type 26 Global Combat Ship</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – N/a

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

| Current Score | Comments |
|-------------------|--------------|
| 7                 |              |

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD) – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM) – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a
