---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Gate
Project: FUTURE STRATEGIC TANKER AIRCRAFT
Page_from: 205.0
Page_to: 206.0
Project_label: Future Rapid Effects System
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_205_206.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE STRATEGIC

TANKER AIRCRAFT

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE STRATEGIC TANKER AIRCRAFT

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Information Superiority)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the REQUIREMENT

The Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft is Planned to Replace the Air to Air Refuelling and some Elements of Air Transport Capability Currently Provided by the Royal Air Force’s Fleet of VC10 and TriStar Aircraft. Air to Air Refuelling is a Key Military Capability that Significantly Increases the Operational Range and Endurance of Front Line Aircraft Across a Range of Defence Roles and Military Tasks.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-Service Dates and Costs are not Set until Projects Reach the Point in Time when the Main Investment Decision is Made I.e Main Gate Approval. Until this Point all Costs and Dates are Outline Assumptions Solely for Internal Planning Purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft Was Nominated as a Potential Private Finance Initiative Project in 1997. an Assessment Phase, to Confirm Whether PFI Would Offer Best Value for Money, Was Launched Following Initial Gate Approval in December 2000.

The Assessment Phase Has Confirmed Industry’s Ability to Meet the Service Requirement, Programme Timescales and Costs and Determined that the Inclusion of Air Transport Capability in the Contract will Represent Value for Money. It Has also Clarified the Manning and Personnel Implications. Ministers Announced on 6 June 2007 that it Had Been Decided to Proceed Towards Financial and Contractual Close which Was Achieved on 27 March 2008.

199

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
38
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
13
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+25
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Explanation of the Need and Boundaries of Current Internal Planning Assumptions for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Latest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability will be Available</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">after a Competition and Several Years of Complex Private Finance Initiative Negotiations, AirTanker Ltd, a Consortium Comprising EADS, Rolls Royce, Cobham, and Thales Were Judged to Offer the Best Prospective PFI Solution. VT Group Joined the Consortium Shortly After. Following Subsequent Resolution of Key Commercial Terms, Secretary of State Announced on 28 February 2005 that AirTanker Ltd Had Been Selected as Preferred Bidder for Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft. Ministers Announced on 6 June 2007 that it Had Been Decided to Proceed Towards Financial and Contractual Close on the Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft PFI. Following Airtanker Ltd’s Successful Completion of the Fund Raising Process, Financial and Contractual Close Was Achieved on 27 March 2008.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2d. Boundaries of Current Internal Cost Assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

200
