---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Assessment phase projects
project: Cipher
page_from: 277.0
page_to: 281.0
project_label: Cipher
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2011_277_281.md
---
| Project Title            |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Cipher                       |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Team Responsible         |                                             |
| Networks                     |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner |                                             |
| Darrell Midgley              |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name   | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| Cipher                       | Pre-Main Investment Decision                |
|                              |                                             |

CIPHER

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

1.  The Requirement

Cipher will provide protection for all of MOD’s sensitive information and communications both at home and overseas. The project encapsulates work to renew the MOD cryptographic inventory and key management systems. Cipher will replace a number of current systems, in particular the General Key Management System.

There are three business drivers for Cipher. The first is to overcome the obsolescence of existing equipment and key management systems. The second is to enable network agility and interoperability with our Allies. The final driver is to improve security and efficiency in the delivery of cryptographic services.

Cipher will be delivered in three increments. Increment 1 provides an Enduring Operational Capability, Increment 2 replaces all legacy services and Increment 3 provides the additional services required to satisfy new requirements.

1.  The Assessment Phase

Cipher is a combination of two earlier MOD projects, the Future Crypto Programme (delivering the hardware) and Interoperable Electronic Key Distribution (the complementary system to deliver keying material, and other supporting configuration and management data). The Initial Gate approval, issued in August 2007, for a combined Assessment Phase for the two programmes authorised an Assessment Phase funding \\\ with agreement that the funding could be increased to \\\ subject to written confirmation from Head of Capability that the additional funding was available. No delivery phase timescale or funding estimate was provided in the Initial Gate submission beyond the available ten year funding profile. However, an Information Note issued in December 2008 stated 2012 as the date for the Initial Operating Capability.

Following Initial Gate approval, two consortia were down-selected and awarded Assessment Phase contracts in November 2008 to evaluate potential options, develop solutions, undertake demonstration programmes and deliver costed delivery phase proposals. The competition was undertaken in accordance with the Initial Gate strategy and the Procurement Strategy and both consortia agreed to at least match MOD funding for their Assessment Phase programmes of work.

Recognising the importance of Cipher and its potential use across Government, the Government

Communication Head Quarters has engaged proactively, providing guidance on standards to ensure that the resulting solutions and services can be readily adopted by Other Government Departments and Partners Across Government and be interoperable with our Allies.

In June 2010, Performance Delivery Improvement issued a report on Cipher. Head of Capability responded by producing a Project Mandate defining the project vision, scope, outcomes, delivery timelines and Governance arrangements. An Information Note was submitted to the Investment Appraisal Board in January 2011 to notify of the changes necessary, with a review of progress being held in February 2011 at a 2-Star Foundation Milestone Review. A Review Note is being prepared for submission to the Investment Approvals Board in April 2011 seeking approval for the revised project timescales, the adoption of an incremental acquisition strategy and a revision to the approved budgetary level for the Assessment Phase \\\ representing an uplift of \\\ to the Initial Gate approval at 50% confidence. The programme includes four key mitigation actions of a) maturing the incremental approach, b) enhancing the delivery team with additional MOD and Government Communications Head Quarters staff, c) developing a detailed and resourced plan and d) improving stakeholder and benefits management.

The two consortia have been actively engaged throughout, to ensure that they remain within the information loop regarding changes to the Acquisition Strategy, with contracts being re-negotiated where necessary to cover extensions to the Assessment Phase.

Project Summary Sheet

CIPHER

# A.3 Progress

1.  Review took place in February 2011. The outcome was to proceed, but with caveats noting that all outstanding actions from the Performance Delivery Improvement Treatment Phase have been rolled up into the recommendations of this review. The additional funding required for the delivery of the extended Assessment Phase has been identified and sufficient staff levels have been agreed.

The production of the Tender Pack is currently the main thrust of the team's efforts, with delivery being planned for end of June 2011. Both consortia are actively engaged in the production of the Tender Pack, to ensure their familiarity with it. This will be supported by the development of the detailed business benefits and project plans by end April 2011.

1.  Capability Risks

Capability risks if Cipher is delayed:

\\\

Crypto capability lacks the flexibility to deliver Network Enabled Capability.

Efficiency savings related to automation of crypto capability are delayed leading to increased demand on service manpower.

1.  Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 56%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Title of Associated Project</th>
<th>
Forecast In Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability
</th>
<th>
Approval Status
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Key Production Authority Futures Project</td>
<td>
2015
</td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 56%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments
</th>
<th>only</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Title
</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
<td>
Approval Status
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Cipher
</td>
<td>
UK Sovereign Competition
</td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">
Description
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">
The Cipher Intergrated Logistic Support strategy aims to provide a robust and 'fit for purpose' solution and assured adherence to the Support Solution. It will articulate the support framework that will be required for Cipher, bringing together the major elements of support, including the potential Contractor Logistic Support arrangements, the Support Solution Envelope and the role of the crypto System Operating Authority, Networks Crypto Services for Defence. The Plan will be developed through progressive discussion with the major Intergrated Logistic Support stakeholders, including both consortia.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Title</td>
<td>
Contractor
</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Increment 1</td>
<td>Awaiting down selection</td>
<td>Demonstration to Manufacture</td>
<td>
Fixed Price
</td>
<td>
Competitive - UK
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

CIPHER

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Project/
Increment Title</th>
<th rowspan="2">
Approved Cost

(£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Approved cost as a

proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</th>
<th>Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cipher</td>
<td>19</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>19</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cipher</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

2.  Unit production cost/Quantities required

3.  Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

4.  Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</th>
<th>In-year expenditure (£m)</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>11</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

CIPHER

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cipher</td>
<td>August 2007</td>
<td>
September 2012
</td>
<td>61</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cipher</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

2.  Full Operating Capability

3.  Support / Service / PFI Contract

Project Summary Sheet
