---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Joint Combat Aircraft
Page_from: 185.0
Page_to: 208.0
Project_label: Joint Combat Aircraft (Lightning II)
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_185_208.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 62%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Joint Combat Aircraft
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Joint Combat Aircraft PT
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore Mark Hopkins (Air Capability)
</Td>
<td>27th April 2012</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>
Current Status of Projects /
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
System Development &amp; Demonstration Production, Sustainment &amp; Follow on Development
</Td>
<td>investment Decision Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
The Joint Combat Aircraft (JCA) is the Requirement for a Multi-Role Aircraft to be Operated Jointly by the Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy from both Land Bases and the New Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers. the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Has Been Selected as the Aircraft to Meet the Joint Combat Aircraft Requirement, and Provides the UK with a Fifth Generation Air System. Joint Combat Aircraft will Provide the UK with an Expeditionary Multi-Role Fighter with the Ability to Enter and Operate Within Contested

<sup>enter Text Here</Sup>airspace. Using Secure Links it will Operate as a Combat Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition &amp;
Reconnaissance Platform Providing Intelligence to Troops on the Ground, and when Required will be Able to Employ a Range of Sophisticated Weaponry, Even Through Adverse Weather.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

Approval Was Obtained in November 1996 to Enter the Concept Demonstration Phase on the Joint Strike Fighter Programme under a Memorandum of Understanding Signed in December 1995. the Phase Began in November 1996 with Two Competing United States Prime Contractors (Boeing and Lockheed Martin) Designing and Flying Demonstration Aircraft on which the Selection of the Preferred Bidder Was Based. the Phase Completed in October 2001 with the Announcement of Lockheed Martin as the Successful Bidder. ~enter\ Text\ Here~Studies into Alternative Options to Joint Strike Fighter to Meet the Requirement Were also Conducted but Were Rejected on Cost Grounds. a Main Gate Demonstraion Approval Was Obtained in January 2001 for the Participation in the System Development and Demonstration Phase of the Joint Strike Fighter Programme.

## A.3. Project History Since Main Gate

Following the 1998 Strategic Defence Review, UK Participation in the Concept Demonstration Phase of the Programme and Significant Analysis, the US Joint Strike Fighter Was Selected to Meet the Joint

Combat Aircraft Requirement for Carrier Strike. a Main Gate Demonstration Approval Was Obtained in January 2001 for Participation in the System Development and Demonstration Phase of the JSF Programme, Leading to Signature that Month by UK and United States Governments of the System Development and Demonstration Memorandum of Understanding. the Selection of Lockheed Martin as the Joint Strike Fighter Air System Prime Contractor Included a Teaming Agreement with Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems to Collectively Form Team Joint Strike Fighter. Two Separate and Competitive Propulsion Contracts Were Awarded to Pratt and Whitney for the F135 Engine and General Electric/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team for the F136 Engine. in April 2011, the F135 Engine Was Selected as the Sole Engine Variant Within the Joint Strike Fighter Programme. Whilst Other Partners Joined the Programme at Level 2 and 3 Entry Arrangements, Only United States and UK Requirements Have Driven the System Development and Demonstration Baseline Solution.

In September 2002 the UK Selected the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing (STOVL) Joint Strike Fighter Variant to Meet the JCA Requirement. a Review of the Joint Strike Fighter Programme and the Viability of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Design Was Completed in January 2005. It Concluded that a Successful Programme of Weight Reduction Initiatives and Other Performance Enhancements Had Restored Confidence that the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Design Should Remain the UK’s Planning Assumption. a Further Review by the Investment Approvals Board in July 2006 Confirmed this Decision.

On 12 December 2006 Minister of State for Defence Equipment and Support Signed the Production

Sustainment and Follow-on Development Memorandum of Understanding, which Was the First of Four Main Gates Planned for the Introduction to Service of Joint Combat Aircraft. in March 2009, Approval Was Given for Phase 2 of the Joint Combat Aircraft Incremental Strategy, for Participation in Joint Initial Operational Test & Evaluation with the United States Services.

In October 2010 the UK Government's Strategic Defence and Security Review Announced that the Joint Combat Aircraft Programme Would Switch Variant from the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant to the Carrier Variant.

1.  Formal Initial Operating Capability for Joint Combat Aircraft Requirement will not be Set until the Main

Gate 4 Decision Point. However, the Department is Planning to Deliver a Capability from both Land and Sea ^enter\ Text\ Here^that is Consistent with Her Majesty's Government Policy to Introduce a Carrier Strike Capability Around 2020.

1.  in-Year Progress

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>during Financial Year 2011/12 the MOD Continued to Pursue a Carrier Variant Aircraft Based Programme in Line with the Variant Change Decision Taken under Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010. in Year Progress During Financial Year 2011/12 Focused on the Following:
<ol Type="1">
<li>continuing Production of Three UK Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft. the First Two of These Jets Have Entered the Final Production Stages and are in Pre Flight Testing at the Lockheed Martin Fort Worth Texas Production Line.</Li>
<li>the Joint Strike Fighter Programme System Development and Demonstration Phase Continues at Pace with a Total of 2,689 Flight Test Hours Achieved Through to March 24th 2012, which Exceeded Test Point and Flight Targets for all Variants</Li>
<li>the Joint Combat Aircraft Project Team Received Approval to Accommodate Further Years of Shared Programme Costs and Long Lead Funding for a Fourth Joint Strike Fighter to be Procured under Low Rate Initial Purchase (LRIP) Contract 7</Li>
<li>the United States Department of Defense Selected Acquisition Report 11 Announced a Slip to The</Li>
</Ol>
Joint Strike Fighter Programme Milestone C, which Represents the Conclusion of System Design and Development, to April 2019. There is No Cost Increase to the UK Contribution Due to this Slip, Since UK Contributions are Fixed under the System Development and Demonstration Memorandum of Understanding. One of the Most Significant Cost Impacts Reflected in the Report Was the US Restructuring Its Production Profile, Reducing the Aircraft Quantity Inside the US Financial Year 2013-17 Timeframe by 179 Aircraft, Flattening the Near Term Production Rate to Reflect a Balanced Development Approach Between Concurrency and Unit Costs. the US is Still Committed to a Total Production Buy of 2,443 Aircraft. the Selected Acquisition Report 11 Cost Estimate Does not Affect the Cost of the UK's First Three Aircraft but the Costs of Future Aircraft will be Affected and this Impact will be Considered in Future Approvals.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  Capability Risks

The Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010 Confirmed the Need for Joint Strike Fighter which Forms the Backbone of Carrier Enabled Power Projection. if the UK Did not Acquire Joint Strike Fighter it Would be Unable to Meet Its Combat Air and Carrier Enabled Power Projection Requirements and be Unable to Support Ground Forces in Multi Threat Environments at a Time and Place of the Government’s Choosing. Joint Strike Fighter Brings No Significant Risks to Other Projects, but Relies Heavily on the Queen Elizabeth

Carrier Programme to Deliver Suitable Carriers to Introduce a Carrier Strike Capability Around 2020. Enter Text Here

1.  Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class (Future Aircraft Carrier)</Td>
<td>
Initial Operating Capability: Ship 1 (Queen Elizabeth) - July 2017<sup>1</Sup>
</Td>
<td>post Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Development &amp;
Demonstration</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>production, Sustainment &amp;
Follow on Development</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Development &amp;
Demonstration</Td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin

(Prime)</Td>
<td>system

Development and

Demonstration</Td>
<td>
Cost Plus Award Fee, Subject to a Maximum Price
</Td>
<td>competitive International Collaboration Procurement. UK Participation Through

Memorandum of

Understanding Agreement. (Note:
The Contract is Placed by the US Department of Defense Who then Contract Lockheed Martin on UK MOD Behalf)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>production, Sustainment &amp;
Follow on Development</Td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin

(Prime)</Td>
<td>
Initial Operational

Test &amp; Evaluation Aircraft</Td>
<td>
Cost Plus Award Fee, Subject to a Maximum Price.
</Td>
<td>competitive International Collaboration Procurement. UK Participation Through

Memorandum of Understanding Agreement. (Note: The Contract is

Placed by the US Department of Defense Who then Contract Lockheed Martin on UK MOD Behalf)</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1.  Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
Support Strategy is Currently under Development for when IOC is Achieved, Current Proposals Assume that Lockheed Martin will Provide a Contracted for Availability Solution Around Performance Based Logisitics

Enter Text Here</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

1

The Forecast Initial Operating Capability are Those Following the Carrier’s Conversion to the Carrier Variant Configuration

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>joint Combat Aircraft</Td>
<td>150</Td>
<td>144</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>150</Td>
<td>144</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
<td>7%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>system Development &amp;</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
1874
</Td>
<td>
2060
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>production, Sustainment &amp;
Follow on Development</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
692
</Td>
<td>
692
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for

Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th>variation (+/- £m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>system Development &amp;</Td>
<td>1874</Td>
<td>1566</Td>
<td>-308</Td>
<td>-19</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>production, Sustainment &amp;
Follow on Development</Td>
<td>692</Td>
<td>634</Td>
<td>-58</Td>
<td>+23</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>2566</Td>
<td>2200</Td>
<td>-366</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 System Development & Demonstration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr12: Exchange Rate Fluctuations Through Financial Year 2011/12</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>march 2012</Th>
<th>-20</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>mpr12: Reclassification of UK Specific Work as Development Focussed Rather than Production (+£9m). Slower than Anticipated Progress on Ship/Air Integration Work (-£5m). Reduced Levels of UK Specific Risk Mitigations Being Required (-£18m). Qualification of UK Weapons for Carriage on F35 (+£14m). Delays to Work Supporting UK's Transition to the Carrier Variant Post SDSR (£9m). Reduced Levels of Engineering Support Required for UK Specific Development Tasks (£11m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+13</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>reassessment of Risk Mitigation Activities in Relation to Reprogramming (+£5m) and Ship/Air Integration (£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+8</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of IRDEL (Foreign Exchange) as per Revised Departmental Policy.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>mpr2011 in Year 2010/11 Exchange Rate Variance (-£3m). Exchange Rate Variance 2011/12 to 2013/14 (-£4m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+59</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>creation and Ongoing Funding of an Engineering Authority (£9m).
£50m Due to the Joint Strike Fighter's Technical Baseline Review Impact On: a) the System Development and Demonstration Now Completing in 2015/16 (+£58m), b) in-Year Delays and Revised Short-Term Plans (-£8m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-31</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>deletion of the Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing Key User Requirement Due to the Strategic Defence and Security Review Decision to Change Aircraft Variant.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-16</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>removal of Cost of Capital Due to Clear Line of Sight Policy Implemented by HM Treasury.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+37</Th>
<th>exchange Rate</Th>
<th>mpr2010 in Year 2009/10 Exchange Rate Variance (+£12m). Exchange Rate Variance 2010/11 to 2013/14 (+£25m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-21</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>cost Reductions and Re-Profiling of UK National Requirements (£15m), Correction of Effect of System Development &amp;
Demonstration Contribution Nonfinancial Contributions (+£1m), Revision of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation Contribution (-£2m), Reduced Forecast for Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing Risk Mitigation (-£5m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-100</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>mpr2009 in Year 2008/09 Exchange Rate Variance (+£4m). Exchange Rate Variance 2009/10 to 2013/14 (+£2m). MPR08: System Development and Demonstration Contribution Against MPR07 Versus MPR08 Exchange Rate: 2007/08 (£12m), 2008/09 to 13/14 (-£6m). MPR07:
Exchange Rate Against Profile until 2013 (-£11m). Change in Dollar/Pound Exchange Rate (MPR06 +£9m; MPR05 -£181m; MPR04 -£85m; MPR03 -£9m; MPR02
+£189m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>
-25
</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>mpr09: In Year Out Turn Against Forecast – Risk Mitigation Action Leading to Minimal Level of Unforeseen Activities Emerging (£10m), Ship Borne Rolling Vertical Landing (-£8m) Due to Overestimate of the Work Required at this Stage of the Programme, Slippage in the Integration of JCA with the Future Aircraft Carriers (-£6m) Due to Slower than Anticipated Progress, Correction of in Year System Development &amp;
Demonstration Contribution (+£2m). Re-Profiling of Future Years
-Comprising of Ship Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing – Reassessment of the Funding Required to Return the Aircraft with a Higher Payload (-£1m), Updated Assessment of the Expected Implementation Work Supporting the Autonomic Logistics Information System – a Global System for all Maintenance and Spares for Joint Strike Fighter (-£2m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</Td>
<td>
-5
</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>an Increase Due to Joint Safe Escape – the Ability to Deploy Weapons Safely (+£1m) which Was not Previously Explicitly Forecast, Refinement of Risk Mitigation Funding for Future Years (-£4m), Reduction of Safety Case – a Requirement to Ensure the Aircraft is Fit to Fly (£2m) Due to the Cost to the UK Being Reduced by the Contribution of Partner Nations.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-1</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>mpr08: In Year Out Turn Against Forecast – Including Minor Changes for 2007/08 (-£14m). UK Non System Development and Demonstration National Work; Changes to Reflect Realism:
UK Precision Guided Bomb (£7m), Carrier Variant Future Integration (+£1m) and Operational Test and Evaluation (-£7m). Maturation of Risk Identified Since Equipment Plan 07: Autonomic Logistic Information System (+£5m), Conformity European Markings (+£6m), Re-Assessment of Risk (+£6m). Re-Assessment of Main Programme Expenditure: Mission Support (+£2m), Reprogramming (+£10m), Bowman (+£4m). Planning Round 08 Option not Included in Equipment Plan07 (-£7m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>+279</Th>
<th>budgetary Factors</Th>
<th>mpr07: Re-Assessment of UK National Work - Attributable Cost which Include: UK Integration Costs: (-£94m), Block 3 Weapons Adjusted to Reflect the Latest Costing from Prime Contractor (+£7m), Safety Case Now Defined to Prepare for Contract Placement in 2007/08 (+£11m) and Re-Assessment of Risk Provision (-£87m). Break Out from Re-Assessment from Risk Provision above which Are: UK Basing Integration &amp; Testing (+£5m), Identification of Operational Test &amp; Evaluation Costs (+£26m). Outturn for 2006/07 Versus Forecast (-£6m). Adjustment for Realism in the Cost of the UK Non- System Development and Demonstration Work Resulting from a Deeper Review of the Estimates Originally Provided by the US (+£43m).costs Benefits Gained from Use of Existing Advance Short Range Air to Air Missile Stocks for Joint Combat Aircraft Trials (-£6m). Fewer Weapon Studies Undertaken in Year (£1m). Improved Project Support Strategy (-£3m). Better Understanding of the Integrated Nature and Requirements of the Aircraft Systems (+£384m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-34</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>mpr06: Re-Profile of UK National Work to Mitigate Increase in Exchange Rate. Main Drivers are Interoperability (-£1m), Capital Studies (-£1m), UK Integrated Helmet Mounted Display System (-£1m) and Carrier Vessel Future Integration (-£3m). Re-Profile of Later Years Follow on Development (£3m).mpr05: Reassessment of Dstl &amp; QinetiQ Tasking (-£10m). Correction of Contingency Estimates Due to Weight Risks in MPR04 (-£15m).</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>-13</Th>
<th>
Accounting Adjustments and

Re-Definitions</Th>
<th>mpr07: The Integrated Project Team Conducted a Review of the Project Work Schedule which Has Given the Team Sufficient Certainty to Include more Accurate Accruals for the Duration of the Project (-£10m). Accounting Adjustment Made in MPR06 Now Reflected in Reprofiling of Programme (-£2m). New Defence Procurement Agency Requirement to Include Price Forecasting Group Costs Within the Equipment Plan (+£1m). Accounting Reclassification of Feasibility Studies (-£2m).</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>
Accounting Adjustments and Re-
Definitions
</Td>
<td>
MPR06: Change of Accounting Treatment for System Development and Demonstration Contributions. (+£19m) Re-Profile of 2005/06 Accrual into Later

Years. (-£18m) Removal of

2005/06 Accrual. Reconciliation of Accrual (+£1m). MPR05: Re Profiling of UK Specific Tasks (+£3m).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-71</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>mpr06: Reviews of the External Missile Systems for Joint Combat Aircraft Resulted in the Removal of the Requirement for Integrating Internally Mounted Brimstone (£41m), Paveway II and III (-£1m) Capabilities and some Internal Configurations of the Advanced Short Range Air-to-Air Missile (£49m). Further UK Participation in the Joint Integrated Test Force to Reflect UK Acceptance into Service Strategy (+£20m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-472</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>mpr05: Provision for Alternate Helmet Mounted Display System Removed (-£40m). Reassessment of 2004/05 Forecast Expenditure (-£12m). Review of Miscellaneous Requirement Including Exchange of Letters Risk Provision (-
£40m), Design of UK Specific Support (-£3m), Environmental Protection (-£3m) and Autonomic Logistic Information System Interoperability (-£6m). Block IV Weapons as a Result of JSF Programme Re-Alignment (£368m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+55</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr07: Re-Alignment of Programme Now Included in Development -
Ship-Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing (+£55m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-29</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr05: Reduction of Risk Line as a Result of Programme Delays (-£29m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>fewer UK Studies than Originally Planned (MPR02 -£1m; MPR03 (£6m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+87</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr 04: Re-Examination of Risk Within the Overall Programme. (+£87m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-308</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.2 Production, Sustainment & Follow on Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-1
</Td>
<td>
Exchange Rate
</Td>
<td>mpr12 Exchange Rate Fluctuations Through Financial Year 2011/12</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>march 2012</Th>
<th>+26</Th>
<th>technical Factors</Th>
<th>mpr12 the F35 Programme Runs Concurrent Development and Production Programmes to Deliver Advanced Capability Earlier than under Legacy Programmes. This Variance Represents the Cost Against the 3 UK Aircraft Purchased to Date of Design Changes Uncovered During Production which Require Re-Design Work and Implementation of Modifications.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>+12</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>mpr12: Estimates for over Target Costs on the First Two UK Production Contracts (+£8m). Diminished Manufacturing Supplies (+£2m). Decreased Contract Preparation Costs (£2m). Correction of Levels of Shared Non-Recurring Programme Costs (+£2m). Increased Costs for Aircraft and Engine Spares (+£2m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>mpr12 Due to the Decision to Change Variant under the Strategic Defence &amp; Security Review the Requirement for Flight Test Instrumentation Was Removed from the Third Aircraft.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>mpr12 the Delayed Delivery of the First UK Aircraft Has Delayed Commencement of UK Flying Operations from that per the Original Approval and Therefore Reduced the Cost of Flying in the Relevant Time Period.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-40</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>no Operational Conversion Unit is Now Required in the Early Years and as Such Support Costs in the Early Years of Flying Aircraft Have Been Reduced.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-28</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>mpr2011: Exchange Rate Variation (-£28m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-11</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>improved Estimate of Production Expenditure (-£12m). Delays in Long Lead Expenditure (+£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+31</Td>
<td>exchange Rate</Td>
<td>mpr2010: Exchange Rate Variation (+£31m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>budgetary Factors</Td>
<td>correction of Composite Share Ratio (UK Contribution to Shared Partner Costs) from MPR09 (£3m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-30</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>improved Understanding of Production Cost Data Related Specifically to Operational Test &amp; Evaluation Aircraft (-£30m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-58</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost- N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>144</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>144</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>1583</Td>
<td>259</Td>
<td>1842</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>1727</Td>
<td>259</Td>
<td>1986</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>joint Combat Aircraft</Td>
<td>-2</Td>
<td>january 2001</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability^3^

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>joint Combat Aircraft</Td>
<td>initial Operating Capability - 6 Embarked Aircraft at Readiness Level 2 (2-5 Days Notice to Move) – to Align with the US Acquisition Framework and Definitions.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates- N/a

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation - N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>joint Combat Aircraft</Td>
<td>yet to be Defined</Td>
<td>uk MOD Continue to Move Towards Main Gate 4 Approval which will Officially Set the Initial Operating and Full Operating Capability Dates per the Approved Incremental Acquisition Strategy.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract- N/a

2

Rather than Passing an Initial Gate, Joint Combat Aircraft Has Used a Tailored Main-Gate Strategy.

3

The in-Service Date Approval will be Sought as Part of the Incremental Production Approval Strategy

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project/ Increment Title
</Th>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>production Sustainment &amp;
Follow-on Development</Td>
<td>
72% Amber
</Td>
<td>
81% Green
</Td>
<td>missed Milestones and under Staffed Team Have Caused the Majority of the Decrease in Sentinel Scores. Missed Milestones Arose Due to Variant Uncertainty Delaying Progress i.e. Establishing a Carrier Variant Training Agreement with the US Navy.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sustainment Development &amp;
Demonstration</Td>
<td>
89% Green
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>previous Score not Available. First Score Against SDD Made in July 2011. This Score will Form the Basis of Future MPR Submissions Though.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>initial 10 Force Elements @ Readiness</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>sufficient Trained and Available Personnel</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>successful Integration of Joint Strike Fighter Support Solution into UK and Joint Supply Chain</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>completion of Main Operating Base</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>sufficient Suitable Personnel Available for Training and Support</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>doctrine in Place</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>suitable Command Structures in Place to Support US Based Initial Operational Test and Evaluation and Operational Conversion Unit, as Well as UK Main Operating Base, Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and Forward Operating Base Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>integration of Joint Combat Aircraft into UK Ground Information Infrastructure.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (4)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Defence Line of

Development</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>lack of Knowledge of 5th Generation Tactics, Training and Procedures, Low Observable Aircraft Employment and Integration with 4th Generation Aircraft and Other Defence Assets may Limit Initial Capability. 5th Generation is a New Capability for the UK with Little/No Current Suitably Qualified Peronnel. the Ability to Assessing and Maintain the Low Observable Characterisics of the Aircraft is Essential to Optimise Capability. Lead Time to Generate Suitably Qualified Personnel is Estimated to be in the Order of Five Years.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</Td>
<td>insufficient Maritime Intra-Theatre Lift to Support Joint Combat Aircraft Aboard Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers. the Potential to Cancel the Fitment of Cats and Traps Would Negate Potential of a COD Delivery Capability in the Future. Ongoing Issue</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>information</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>uk Ground Information Infrastructure may be Unable to Support the Requirements of Joint Combat Aircraft Information Systems</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>training</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>reliance on US Navy Training System for Initial Throughput and Training of Early Instructor Pilots and Squadron Pilots. the UK Would be Equally Reliant on the US Marine Corps for Training Should the Decision be Taken to Revert to the STOVL Variant.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>infrastructure</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>delays to Formal Announcement of Joint Combat Aircraft Main Operating Base Places Time Pressure on Infrastructure Provision. the Lack of a Formal Announcement of Joint Combat Aircraft Main Operating Base Means that the Programme to Deliver JCA Basing is Now Behind Schedule.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Joint Combat Aircraft

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1</Td>
<td>equipment /
Training</Td>
<td>survivability</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2</Td>
<td>equipment /
Information</Td>
<td>interoperability</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3</Td>
<td>equipment /
Doctrine</Td>
<td>combat Radius</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>
CV Recovery
</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>mission Reliability</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>logistic Footprint</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>doctrine</Td>
<td>sortie Generation</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>7 (3)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>7 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Programme Manager Assessed that the UK’s Aspirations for Interoperability using the Carrier Variant of the Joint Strike Fighter Were more Complex than Initially Thought. This Could Lead to Cost Growth on the Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>the Carrier Landing Speed of the Carrier Variant Remains at the Limit of the Joint Strike Fighter US Key Performance Parameter of 145kts and is a Watch Item.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>concerns over Ability for the UK to Generate Sufficient Suitably Qualified and Equiped Personnel in 5th Generation Capability</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous Report of "At Risk" Referred to Concerns on the Performance of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variant. Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review Announcement to Change Procurement Strategy and using US Indices this is Now Assessed as "Forecast to be Met".</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>4</Th>
<th>changed Capability Requirements</Th>
<th>previous Key Performance Measure (KPM) Referred to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Mission Performance and Was Reported in MPR10 as "At Risk". Following the SDSR Announcement to Change the Procurement Strategy to Procure the Carrier Variant this KPM Has Been Removed and Replaced the US Programme KPM for Carrier Variant Recovery Measuring the Landing Speed Onto the Carrier.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous Report of "At Risk" Referred to Concerns on the Performance of the STOVL Variant. Following the Strategic Defence and Securtiy Review Announcement to Change Procurement Strategy and using US Indices this is Now Assessed as "Met Forecast".</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>based on Modelling and Simulation Results, the Range Capability for Joint Strike Fighter Short Take Off and Vertical Landing is Approaching the Specified Target Set for UK Requirements Based on UK Operating Scenarios. However, this Potential Shortfall is Based Primarily on Modelling with Very Limited Experience in Actual Flight Test. Further Flight Testing is Planned to Gain an Accurate Assessment of this Potential Problem and Mitigation Actions will be Developed Accordingly.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>this KUR Represents a Measure of the Amount of Support Equipment Required to Allow Joint Combat Aircraft to be Deployed on Operations. as the Joint Strike Fighter System Design Has Matured, the Amount and Design of Equipment Required for Deployment in Support of Joint Combat Aircraft Has Reduced to Below the Contractually Specified Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>historic</Th>
<th>4</Th>
<th>
Technical Factors
</Th>
<th>the Short Take Off Element of KUR 04 (Based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be Changed in the Ongoing KUR Review, Although Current Projections Indicate Robust Short Take Off Performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight Challenges and Propulsion System Integration Issues Place the Vertical Landing Bring Back Element of KUR 04 at Increased Risk; the Integrated Project Team Has Commenced Programme Action to Amend the System Development and Demonstration Contract to Satisfy a Requirement to Undertake Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>subject to Intensive Programme Action by Prime Contractor. Funded Design Options that Significantly Reduce Risk Have Been Identified and Further Changes will be Considered in Due Course.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2011</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>changed Capability Requirements</Td>
<td>previous Key Performance Measure Referred to Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Mission Performance and Was Reported in MPR10 as "At Risk". Following the Strategic Defence and Security Review Announcement to Change the Procurement Strategy to Procure the Carrier Variant this Key Performance Measure Has Been Removed and Replaced the US Programme Key Performance Measure for Carrier Variant Recovery Measuring the Landing Speed Onto the Carrier.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>based on Modelling and Simulation Results, the Range Capability for Joint Strike Fighter Short Take Off and Vertical Landing is Approaching the Specified Target Set for UK Requirements Based on UK Operating Scenarios. However, this Potential Shortfall is Based Primarily on Modelling with Very Limited Experience in Actual Flight Test. Further Flight Testing is Planned to Gain an Accurate Assessment of this Potential Problem and Mitigation Actions will be Developed Accordingly.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>this KUR Represents a Measure of the Amount of Support Equipment Required to Allow Joint Combat Aircraft to be Deployed on Operations. as the Joint Strike Fighter System Design Has Matured, the Amount and Design of Equipment Required for Deployment in Support of Joint Combat Aircraft Has Reduced to Below the Contractually Specified Requirement.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the Short Take Off Element of KUR 04 (Based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be Changed in the Ongoing KUR Review, Although Current Projections Indicate Robust Short Take Off Performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight Challenges and Propulsion System Integration Issues Place the Vertical Landing Bring Back Element of KUR 04 at Increased Risk; the Integrated Project Team Has Commenced Programme Action to Amend the System Development and Demonstration Contract to Satisfy a Requirement to Undertake Ship-Borne Rolling Vertical Landing.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>subject to Intensive Programme Action by Prime Contractor. Funded Design Options that Significantly Reduce Risk Have Been Identified and Further Changes will be Considered in Due Course.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Performance

Measure</Th>
<th>forecast</Th>
<th>operational Impact of Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>2</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>reduced Interoperability may Limit Opportunities for Allied Aircraft to Operate from the Decks of Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>action Taken by Community of Interest 1 Community and Air Command to Engage with US Air Force to Understand Support Requirements to Maintain Low Observable Characteristics will Address this KPM. US National Disclosure Policy and UK Access to Required Data Remain Issues to Overcome.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>march 2012</Th>
<th>4</Th>
<th>at Risk</Th>
<th>joint Strike Fighter Programme Development Action will Address this Key Performance Measure</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>as a Result of the Decision of Purchase the Carrier Variant this Measure is Now Regarded as to be Met.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>as a Result of the Decision of Purchase the Carrier Variant this Measure is Now Regarded as to be Met.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>6</Td>
<td>to be Met</Td>
<td>as a Result of the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review Decision to Purchase the Carrier Variant, this Measure is Now Assessed as 'To be Met'</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>3</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>inability to Strike some Targets at the Extreme Range Capability of Aircraft and Weapon System.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>4</Td>
<td>at Risk</Td>
<td>severely Limits the Operational Effectiveness of the Platform and Result in High Waste of Weapons</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
