---
Year: 2007.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Gate
Project: FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM (FRES)
Page_from: 183.0
Page_to: 186.0
Project_label: Future Rapid Effects System
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2007_183_186.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM (FRES)

Picture not Available

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE RAPID EFFECT SYSTEM

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability: Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the REQUIREMENT

The MoD Has Outlined a Two Track Approach to Meeting Its Armoured Fighting Vehicle Requirement. in the Short Term it Has an Urgent Need to Upgrade the Current Fleet. in the Longer Term it Needs to Equip United Kingdom Armed Forces with a Medium Weight Capability that Would be Able to Project Power World-Wide Rapidly. FRES is the Response to this Longer Term Requirement.

FRES will Deliver a New, Medium Weight Armoured Vehicle Fleet with Higher Levels of Deployability and Survivability than the Current Fleet, with the Potential to Grow Its Capability as New Technology Becomes Available. the Current Planning Assumption is to Deliver over 3,000 Vehicles. the Original Requirement Was for 1,757 Vehicles but this Was Increased in 2004 under an Equipment Programme Option when the Total Fleet Requirement Had Been Established

FRES will be Part of a Balanced Force Consisting of Heavy, Medium and Light Brigades Giving the Ability to Deploy Forces Rapidly with Higher Levels of Firepower, Protection and Mobility than Light Forces can Achieve, but with Deployability and Agility that Cannot be Achieved by Heavy Forces. the Current Threat on Operations, Particularly from Rocket Propelled Grenades, Heavy Machine Guns and Mines/Improvised Explosive Devices, Has Reinforced the Need for Adequately Protected Armoured Vehicles.

FRES will Replace the Army’s Obsolescent Saxon, FV 430 and Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked) Vehicles

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-Service Dates and Costs are not Set until Projects Reach the Point in Time when the Main Investment Decision is Made I.e Main Gate Approval. Until this Point all Costs and Dates are Outline Assumptions Solely for Internal Planning Purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The FRES Fleet will Encompass 16 Roles. the Total Capability is Expected to Comprise Four Families of Vehicles; Utility, Reconnaissance, Fires and Manoeuvre Support. an Incremental Approach to Capability Delivery is Envisaged with an Initial Operating Capability Comprising the First Elements of the Utility Fleet Followed by a Phased Approach to Delivering the Full Capability in Planned Increments Thereafter. Each Family of Vehicles will Have Its Own Assessment, Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. the Initial Assessment Phase Was Approved in April 2004 and Has Focused Primarily on Those Roles that will Make Up the Initial Operating Capability. Following a Competition, Atkins, an Independent Systems House, Was Appointed in November 2004. Led by the FRES IPT, the Systems House Has Been Integrated into a Team which also Includes Defence Science Technology Laboratories and the Equipment Capability Customer. Under the Strategic Direction of the MoD, the Systems House Provides Objective Analysis of the Options for Meeting the Requirement, Manages the Programme of Technical Risk Reduction Work and Has Brought an Industrial Perspective to the Development of the Acquisition Strategy for Future Phases.

A Number of Options for Meeting the Utility Vehicle Requirement Have Been Considered, Including Solutions Currently Available Off the Shelf, Existing Development Programmes and New Start Options. Extensive Analysis Has Demonstrated that Vehicles Currently Available Off the Shelf (OTS) Cannot Carry the Weight Necessary to Meet the FRES Protection Requirements And, Furthermore, Do not Have the Growth Potential to be Developed to Meet it in the Future. New Start Options are Too Long and Too Costly and Therefore both OTS and New Start Options Have Been Discounted. an Assessment of Platforms Currently in Development Indicates that They Do Have the Potential to Operate at the Weight Necessary to Provide Adequate Protection. the Potential of Current Development Vehicles to Meet the FRES Requirement will be Further Examined in Detail in 2007.

The Acquisition Strategy Has Been Approved. the Approved Approach is to Establish an Alliance Led by the Department, Who will be Supported by a Strong and Independent Industrial Player Acting in the Role of System of Systems Integrator (SOSI). the Strategy Includes a Strong Competitive Element with the SOSI, the Vehicle Design and the Vehicle Integrator to be Selected by Competition.

The Original Scope of the Initial Assessment Phase Has Been Expanded to Include a Detailed Assessment of Candidate Platforms Against the Requirement and Parallel Work to Evaluate and Select a SOSI. Based on Current Plans We Shall Select the Platform or Platforms to be Taken Forward into the Demonstration

Phase by November 2007. a Two Stage Approach to the Main Investment Decision is Envisaged. Stage

1 will be Prior to the Launch of the Demonstration Phase with Stage 2 Releasing Funding for the Manufacture Phase. Future Assessment and Demonstration Phases will Address the Requirements of the Other Vehicle Families.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
618<sup></Sup>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
113<sup>†</Sup>
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
+505
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

\ Includes the Costs of the Assessment Phase for the Initial Operating Capability Roles and also the Assessment Phase for the Specialist Roles.

^†^ Specifically Only Included Approval for the Initial Assessment Phase for the Initial Operating Capability Roles.

## 2c. Explanation of the Need and Boundaries of Current Internal Planning Assumptions for Introduction of Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>earliest</Th>
<th>latest</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability will be Available</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">fres will Deliver a New, Medium Weight Armoured Vehicle Fleet with Higher Levels of Deployability and Survivability than the Current Fleet, with the Potential to Grow Its Capability as New Technology Becomes Available. the Detailed Analysis of the Candidate Current Development Platforms will Enable the Performance, Cost, Schedule and Risks of These Candidate Solutions to be Fully Understood and will Inform the Main Investment Decision. the in-Service Date (ISD) Covers Only the Initial Operating Capability.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2d. Boundaries of Future Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Costs

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

THIS PAGE is INTENTIONALLY BLANK
