---
Year: 2015.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Apache Attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme
Page_from: 216.0
Page_to: 221.0
Project_label: Apache Attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2015_216_221.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project Name</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>team Responsible</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>apache Project Team</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>senior Responsible Owner Date Appointed Planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>air Cdre Richard Mason OBE MA RAF (Capability Director Joint Helicopter Command) TBC TBC</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Name Current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>apache Capability Sustainment Programme Assessment Phase</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

UK Defence Sought Through Competition to Provide an Attack Helicopter Capability to Replace the Lynx/Tube-Launched Optically Tracked Wire-Guided Missile Capability During the 1990s. the Competition Resulted in the Selection of the GKN Westland (Now AgustaWestland) Apache WAH-64, Known to the British Army as the Apache AH Mk1, which Entered Service in 2004.

The UK’s Apache AH Mk1 is a Modified US AH-64d Block 1 and is Becoming Increasingly Obsolescent. the Attack Helicopter Capability Sustainment Programme (AH CSP) Addresses Existing and Forecast Critical Obsolescence Issues that will Progressively Degrade Operational Capability of the Current Apache AH Mk1 Towards the End of this Decade. This Obsolescence Results from the Withdrawal from Service of the Equivalent US Apache Model Which, if Left Untreated, Would Result in the Complete Loss of the Attack Helicopter Capability over the Period 2020 to 2025. the Aim of the AH CSP is to Enable the Required Attack Helicopter Capability in Support of Extant Defence Policy to be Sustained until at Least 2040.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The AH CSP Initial Gate Was Approved in November 2014 at a Cost for the Assessment Phase of £14m not to Exceed and Resulted in the Following:

-   the Down-Selection of the Apache AH-64e as the Sole Platform Option to be Taken Forward into the Assessment Phase.

-   the Launch of the Acquisition Process Inviting the United States Government to Prepare a Foreign Military Sales Case for the Supply of 50 Aircraft. the Foreign Military Sales Case may Reuse Components from the Current Apache Helicopters where Economically Viable to Do so and also Looks to Acquire the Associated Supporting Equipment and Services. AgustaWestland Has Been Given the Opportunity to Make a Proposal to Meet the Same Requirements Provided it Has the Rights and Ability to Do So.

-   the Initiation of Analysis to Determine the Longer Term Support and Training Solutions that will Sustain the Apache Through Life, Together with the Associated Procurement Strategies and Plans.

The Eventual Down Selection of the Preferred Bidder will be Determined on an Assessment of the Relative Cost, Risk and Delivery Confidence of the Proposals Received.

The Main Gate Business Case is Planned to be Submitted to the Investment Approvals Committee (IAC) by March 2016 and a Decision is Anticipated by June 2016. the Main Gate Approval will Enable:

-   the Formal Agreement with Either the US Government or AgustaWestland for the Supply of the Helicopters and Associated Supporting Equipment and Services.

-   the Launch of the Procurement Processes for the Required Longer Term Training and Support Services.

-   Governance to be Put in Place, and Entry Onto the DMPP.

1.  in-Year Progress

The Initial Gate Business Case Was Approved by Ministers on 25 November 2014 and Confirmed by the Investment Approvals Committee on 19 December 2014. Leading Up to the Approval, a Common Statement of Requirements and the Associated Procurement Documentation Was Prepared that Was Released to the US Government and AgustaWestland on 25 November 2014. the Project Team Has Since Been Engaged in Responding to Points of Clarifications Ahead of the Expected Receipt of Proposals by 15 September 2015.

The Period Leading Up to the Initial Gate Approval Was Treated as an Extended Concept Phase to Enable some Early Analysis Relating to Aircraft Engineering and Certification to be Taken Forward that Was Agnostic of the Eventual Procurement Route. This Has Continued During the Assessment Phase with Further Work that will Result in the Determination of the Aircraft Type Certification Basis under UK Airworthiness Regulations. This Work will also Develop the Safety Requirements and Obtain the Information Needed to Support or to Identify Potentially Significant Safety Risks which will Inform the Future Development &

Manufacture Phase Programme of Work. the Extended Concept Phase also Enabled some Early Work on Training and Support Analysis to be Taken Forward. This Has Resulted in Training Needs Analysis Activity Being Contracted which is Expected to Complete by July 2015. the Support Solution Analysis will Inform the Main Gate Business Case for Longer Term Support.

1.  Capability Risks

The AH CSP Addresses Existing and Forecast Critical Obsolescence Issues that will Progressively Degrade Operational Capability of the Current Apache AH Mk1 Towards the End of the Decade, Following the Withdrawal from Service of the Equivalent US Apache Model. if Left Untreated, These Would Result in the Complete Loss of the Attack Helicopter Capability in the Period 2020 to 2025.

1.  Associated Projects - NA

2.  Procurement Strategy - NA

3.  Support Strategy – NA

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>apache CSP</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>13</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>13</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name | Lowest Forecast (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Forecast (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Apache CSP                 | \\\                   | \\\                | \\\                    |
| Total (£m)             | \\\                   | \\\                | \\\                    |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost – N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2015 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
1
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>forecast Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment

Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>apache CSP</Td>
<td>25/11/14</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>apache CSP IOC ( Planning Assumption)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>apache CSP FOC ( Planning Assumption)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – N/a

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 80%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
72
</Td>
<td>this Was the First Sentinel Score for AH CSP Following Initial Gate Approval</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD) – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM) – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a
