---
year: 2007.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: MILITARY AFLOAT REACH AND SUSTAINABILITY (MARS)
page_from: 193.0
page_to: 194.0
project_label: Military Afloat Reach and Sustainability
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2007_193_194.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH

AND SUSTAINABILITY Picture not available

(MARS)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

MILITARY AFLOAT REACH AND SUSTAINABILITY

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>MARS will investigate a wide range of solutions to provide the logistic support requirements of the future Royal Navy and sea-based support to deployed forces. MARS vessels will play a significant part in providing sea-based support to amphibious, land and air forces in the littoral where Host Nation Support is absent or limited. As the MARS vessels come into service, they will replace the current Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) vessels as they are gradually withdrawn from service. MARS vessels will provide three capabilities:

x Bulk Consumables (BC) – the provision of fuel, oils, lubricants, ammunition, food, water and air stores to embarked forces. x Joint Sea Based Logistics (JSBL) - the provision of logistic support from afloat to Joint Forces ashore. x Forward Aviation Support (FAS) - the provision of support to maritime rotary-wing operations and support to amphibious rotorcraft operations, as well as the provision of operational maintenance support for deployed helicopters.

MARS plans to deliver a number of dedicated tankers followed by a number of other vessels. The actual number and type of vessels required will be determined during the Assessment Phase. These ships will be double hulled to comply with environmental requirements.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e Main gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The MARS project received formal approval to enter its Assessment Phase in July 2005.

The initial planned contractual route for meeting the MARS requirement was the creation of an

187

alliance, consisting of the MoD and a number of industrial partners. However, as a result of ongoing progress made on the emerging Maritime Industrial Strategy, and taking account of changes to the maritime industrial landscape, the MARS procurement strategy is currently under review.

Nevertheless, the Defence Industrial Strategy principle, that there is no absolute requirement to build all Royal Fleet Auxiliary vessels onshore, remains extant. For the less complex elements of MARS, such as the tankers, a range of procurement options are envisaged, up to and including a fully competitive (and international) approach to their procurement.

All data following is based on the current procurement strategy.

The MARS Assessment Phase will cover generic assessment and design activity for the whole programme and the initial design for the first class of ships.

The MARS ships are expected to be procured in distinct phases, with class 1 and each subsequent class being approved by separate submissions to the Department’s Investment Approvals Board. The approved budget for the MARS Assessment Phase is £44m and the current forecast for the Assessment Phase is \\\.

Due to the planned phased nature of the project, further design on subsequent classes will take place after the main investment decision, and an early estimate for this was \\\. However, due to the reprofiling of the MARS programme, this has now reduced to \\\. This brings the total expected cost of Assessment work and later design for future classes to \\\, subject to more detailed investigations into the nature of future classes and the level of design to be undertaken.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
44
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Latest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">The MARS programme will replace a large number of existing Royal Fleet Auxiliary vessels. The capability is essential for the effective deployment of the Royal Navy and replaces existing ships that will be otherwise operating outwith Maritime Pollution (Marpol) regulations at ages well beyond their design life.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

188
