---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: ADVANCED JET TRAINER
page_from: 17.0
page_to: 22.0
project_label: ADVANCED JET TRAINER
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_17_22.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

ADVANCED JET

TRAINER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

UNITED KINGDOM MILITARY FLYING TRAINING SYSTEM (UKMFTS)

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Theatre Airspace)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The MoD requires an Advanced Jet Trainer for pre-operational training of fast-jet pilots. This task is currently fulfilled by the Hawk TMk1 aircraft, which will need to be replaced in the tactical weapons training role from 2010 onwards. The full range of skills required for aircrew to fly front-line aircraft cannot now be gained using the current Advanced Jet Trainer, so more training on operational aircraft has to be undertaken. The introduction of Typhoon and the future Joint Combat Aircraft exacerbates this training gap such that the required standard for Typhoon aircrew is not achievable with Hawk TMk1.

The Advanced Jet Trainer is the Fast Jet element of the wider UK Military Flying Training System programme and will deliver capabilities including: a modern glass cockpit environment, an avionics suite compliant with latest airspace legislation, an embedded training system that simulates front-line sensors and weapons and a flexible and upgradeable mission system. Support, Infrastructure and a Ground Based Training Environment will also be provided. Advanced Jet Trainer is contracted for in such a way to ensure that it can be subsumed within the main UK Military Flying Training System contract at a later date.

The development and production programmes remain on track to deliver on time. The production aircraft build standard was fixed at Main Gate. A capability enhancement has had Business Case approval. Contract negotiations are underway for provision of aircraft support post delivery.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
BAE Systems, Warton
</td>
<td>Assessment to Demonstration</td>
<td>Cost plus incentive fee, subject to a maximum price</td>
<td>
No Acceptable Price

No Contract (NAPNOC)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BAE Systems Insyte, Chelmsford</td>
<td>Manufacture to InService</td>
<td>Target Cost Incentive Fee</td>
<td>
No Acceptable Price

No Contract (NAPNOC)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
467
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
497
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-30
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+3
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Additional Assessment work on an enhancement capability, Operational Capability 2. Including design and development contract increases (+£4m), support costs increases (+£1m) and reduction in the cost of capital (-£2m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-11</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Changes between Production Contract Award and Planning Round submission, including changes to production support estimates (-£4m), transfer of risk to UK Military Flying Training System (-£8m), increase in demonstration costs (+£2m) and changes in Cost of Capital (-£1m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-15</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Change in BAE Systems labour rates from approval to the agreed contract price as a result of the agreement of rates between the MoD and BAE Systems.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-7</td>
<td>Risk Differential</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the highest acceptable (80%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>-30</td>
<td colspan="2"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
338
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2007/2008
</td>
<td>
2008/2009
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13.1</td>
<td>
12.7
</td>
<td>28</td>
<td>
28
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
ISD is defined as the date where Hawk 128 can be used for the development of the future Phase 4 training syllabus. This will require Initial Logistic Support Date to be achieved, delivery of 4 aircraft to Operational Capability 0 standard, 6 pilots converted to type and at least a Part Task Trainer.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
November 2009
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
February 2010
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+4
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
March 2008
</td>
<td>
+4
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Risk increase in late delivery of a dependency resulting in a 4 month slip to the ISD noted at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Historic
</td>
<td>
-7
</td>
<td>
Risk Differential
</td>
<td>Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and highest acceptable (80%) estimates at Main Gate.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
-3
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>Cost £m</th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Other</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-4</td>
<td>
Reflects the anticipated change in

BAE Systems estimates for supporting Hawk 128</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Cost of Current equipment</td>
<td>+4</td>
<td></td>
<td>Additional cost of further support to Hawk TMk1 Training Fleet</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

There is no operational impact as the Hawk TMk1 Out of Service date has been extended such that the continuity of Flying training will be maintained.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
SR-396 The System shall be powered by a jet engine or engines
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
SR-475 The System platform shall incorporate primary flying controls that are fully operable from both cockpits.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
SR-513 The System platform shall incorporate a Stores Management System to allow the selection, firing/release and jettison of simulated weapon.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
SR-558 The System platform shall present Artificial Intelligence radar data to allow search, location, tracking and engagement of real, simulated and synthetic airborne targets.
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
SR-604 The System platform shall perform representative Basic Fighter Manoeuvres.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
SR-649 The System platform shall complete a low level evading route of at least 45 mins at a speed of at least 420 knotts.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
SR-636 The System platform shall present automatic steering for planned attacks on surface targets involving target position correction in-flight and updating of the targeting system to ensure accurate attacks.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
SR-677 To the maximum extent possible, the System shall embody technology transparency in order to accommodate Platform upgrades without redesign of functionally unrelated areas.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>
SR-998 The platform shall be Reliable and Maintainable.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
89%
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
-1
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved key requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Key Requirement</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th colspan="2">
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 2008</td>
<td>KUR 04</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
At Main Gate the KURs were endorsed noting operational capability of the aircraft would be delivered incrementally. Following further assessment work KUR 4 was revised to reflect the
</td>
<td>that the</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>new requirement.

endorsed in Operational Capability 2 approval. The revised KUR 4 is forecast to be met.
</td>
<td>This was</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

At Initial Gate (December 2002) Advanced Jet Trainer was a component of United Kingdom

Military Flying Training System. Within the £39m approved for United Kingdom Military Flying Training System assessment, £2m related to Advanced Jet Trainer and a PFI approach was assumed. In July 2003 a Ministerial Direction was given to conventionally procure Hawk 128 from BAE Systems.

In 2003 a £31m Risk Reduction Contract was placed with BAES to cover risk reduction activities to October 2003. BAE Systems continued to work at risk on Assessment Phase activities up to November 2004 when approval was given for a combined Assessment & Development Phase based on an incremental approach at a Not To Exceed price of £196m and a Not To Exceed completion date of August 2008; the Assessment Phase element of this approval was around £75m. A Design and Development Contract was let to BAE Systems in December 2004.

Main Gate approval was achieved in August 2006 for a Not To Exceed figure of £497m at 80% confidence, compared to Initial Gate approval of £611m at 90%. This approval set the aircraft build standard, definition of In-Service Date, Key System Requirements and aircraft numbers.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 77                        | 14%                                                       |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 75                        | 14%                                                       |
| Variation                     | +2                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
August 2006
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
November 2004
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
21
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>472</td>
<td>490</td>
<td>497</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>578</td>
<td>593</td>
<td>611</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
February 2009
</td>
<td>July 2009</td>
<td>
February 2010
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>July 2009</td>
<td>
February 2010
</td>
<td>
December 2010
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
