---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Specialist Vehicles
Page_from: 170.0
Page_to: 179.0
Project_label: Scout Specialist Vehicles
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_170_179.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 27%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Specialist Vehicles
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
SCOUT SV
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Maj Gen Bruce Brealey
</Td>
<td>01 April 2013</Td>
<td>30 September 2013</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Recce Block 1 Demonstration Recce Block 2 Demonstration Recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture Recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

Specialist Vehicles will Provide a Key Element to the Army's Multi-Role Brigades. the Scout Platform and Supporting Variants will Offer Improved Fightability, Survivability, Lethality, and Have a Greater Find Capability than the Increasingly Obsolescent Legacy Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked) Fleet. Specialist Vehicles will Provide a Mobile, Protected Ground Platform for Reconnaissance to Fill a Capability Gap and will Contribute to a Combined Arms Capability of Modern, Medium-Weight, Strategically Deployable, Tracked Vehicles. the Current Planning Assumption is to Deliver a Reconnaissance Fleet of Up to \\\ Vehicles Incrementally.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

GENERAL: Future Rapid Effect System Specialist Vehicles Entered Its Assessment Phase

(Assessment Phase 2) in June 2008. the Approval Covered the Anticipated Specialist Vehicles Fleet Scope, with High Priority Afforded to Scout (Recce Block 1), Given the Pressing Need to Replace Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked). Specialist Vehicles Was Assumed to Consist of Three Recce Blocks Plus Medium Armour and Manoeuvre Support Components, all Mounted on a Common Base Platform. in Broad Terms the Assessment Phase Studies Confirmed that the Common Base Platform Concept Was Viable for all Platforms and also Set the Time, Cost Performance and Risk Envelope for Recce Block 1.

TRADE-OFFS: Assessment Studies Were Used to Derive the Preferred Programme Option and Its Associated Characteristics of Performance (Requirements), Cost, Time and Risk, Ahead of Launching a Competition to Select the Prime Contractor. These Studies Included an Analysis of Potential Solutions Ranging from Off-the-Shelf Platforms, Modified Off-the-Shelf, and New Design, as Well as Studies on Critical Sub-System Choices E.g. Primary Sighting System. Industry Was Engaged Throughout to Ensure Data Used Reflected Market Reality, Whilst Still Keeping Competitive Choices Open. the Military Customer and User Were Engaged Throughout the Process.

ACQUISITION STRATEGY: Assessment Phase 2 also Determined the Most Appropriate Acquisition

Strategy for the Specialist Vehicles. the Product of this Strand Was Subject to a Separate Investment Approvals Board Approval. This Approval Endorsed the Use of Open International Competition to Select a 'Prime Contractor' to Conduct the Demonstration Phase for Recce Block 1, and Subject to Further Approval Included Progression to Manufacture and Initial in-Service Support, Together with a Common Base Platform for all Specialist Vehicles. Major Enabling Sub-Systems E.g Guided Weapons (Missiles) for Later Recce Blocks Were not Included in the Scope of Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform in Order to Leave Competitive Choice for Later Recce Blocks E.g. Missile Coherence with Team Complex Weapons.

An Update to the Acquisition Strategy Was Endorsed in Jan 13. in Line with the Common Base Platform Concept the Protected Mobility Recce Support Vehicle can be Used with Minor Sub-System Changes for the Ambulance, Command and Engineer Recce Roles. Similarly, for the Three Remaining Roles, Further Studies Have Been Contracted to Assess These Requirements.

The Recce Block 1 Element of Assessment Phase 2 Was Conducted in Four Stages, with the Key Findings from Each Stage Captured in a Stage Report. the Final Stage - The Formal Competition and Investment Approvals Board Approval for Demonstration Was Conducted under an Aggressive Timeline with Transition Through Main Gate 1 Achieved Seven Months Ahead of Forecast. in 2010, the Project Was Subject to Re-Approval by the New Coalition Government which Delayed Contract Award by Three Months, Due to the Pre-Election Period.

Assessment Phase 2 Included Risk Reduction Studies and Demonstrators on the Specialist Vehicles Platforms and on High Performance Thermal Imaging Sighting Systems which Were Subsequently Downselected as Part of the Main Competition.

The Recce Block 1 Element of the Assessment Phase 2 Concluded with a Major International Competition, which Selected General Dynamics UK Ltd as the Prime Contractor.

## A.3. Project History

MAIN GATE 1 - DEMONSTRATION RECCE BLOCK 1 ONLY: The Outcome of the Specialist Vehicles Assessment Phase for Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform Was Presented as Evidence for the Specialist Vehicles Main Gate 1 Approval for Entry into Demonstration. as Part of this Main Gate 1 Approval, the Office of Government Commerce Conducted a Gateway Review in September 2009, Followed by a Full Major Projects Review Group Examination in December 2009, which Confirmed that Specialist Vehicles Was in a Position to Proceed to Its Planned Demonstration Phase with General Dynamics UK Ltd as the Prime Contractor. Approval Was Re-Endorsed by the New Coalition Government in June 2010. the Contract with General Dynamics UK Ltd Commits to the

Demonstration Phase for Recce Block 1 Only, Whilst Taking Contractual Option for Manufacture for Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform Options for Later Blocks and Initial in-Service Support. This Contract Includes Seven Anchor Milestones.

Main Gate 1 Did not Set Initial Operating Capability, Full Operating Capability or Total Fleet Requirements, but Merely Noted the Planning Assumptions Associated with These for Service Entry at the Time. There Was also Recognition that the then Forthcoming Strategic Defence and Security Review Could Change Total Fleet Requirements and Assumptions, and These Should not Therefore be Set at Main Gate 1.

Planning Round 11 and Strategic Defence and Security Review Savings Options Removed the Medium Armour Element and Reset the Total Vehicle Fleet Numbers Up to \\\, with the Delivery Profile Recast to Aspire to the Emerging Army Restructuring under Strategic Defence and Security Review (Five Multi Role Brigades). Final Size and Shape of the Specialist Vehicles Fleet will not be Set until

Main Gate 2, in \\\, when the First Major Production Investment Decision will be Taken. the Recce Block 1 Planning Assumption for Service Entry Was also Deferred by Nine Months from \\\to \\\due to a Strategic Defence and Security Review Savings Option. the Enduring Need for the Specialist Vehicles Project Was Noted in an Information Note to the Investment Approvals Committee in June 2011.

FURTHER APPROVALS: It Should be Noted that Specialist Vehicles Does not Have a Single Main Gate Approval. the Size of the Programme, Together with Previous Lessons Learned in Other Programmes, Determined that a Two Stage Main Gate Approach Should be Used; Main Gate 1 for Entry into Demonstration for Recce Block 1 and Common Base Platform Only, with a Second Main Gate (2) for Entry into Production, the Latter Being the Major Investment Decision. Later Approvals (in Effect subMain Gates) will Approve Demonstration and Manufacture of the Remaining Protected Mobility Recce Support Roles and any Future Needs.

DEMONSTRATION PHASE PROGRESS : Continuing to Build on Progress Made in 2011/12, the Programme Completed Its Initial Milestones Reaching the Entry Review into the Preliminary Design Review.

MAIN WEAPONS SELECTION - SCOUT: Approval for the Selection of the 40mm Case Telescope

Weapon System Was Given in 2008 to Enable Commonality with the Warrior Capability Sustainment Programme, Thus Taking the Benefit of Common Ammunition and Training. Qualification for the 40mm Case Telescoped Weapon System is Led by the Scout - Specialist Vehicles Team.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

During the Year the Programme Continued to Make Progress with a Number of Design Maturity Events Completed in the Run Up to Preliminary Design Review Exit in December 2012. This Included:

-   May 12 – Mine Blast De-Risking Trial

-   June 12 – Mobile Test Rig Roll-Out (Start of Mobility Trials)

-   September 12 – Ambulance Role Mock-Up

-   December 12 – Preliminary Design Review Exit

-   January 13 –risk Review (Interim)

The Mine Blast De-Risking Trial Completed in May 12 Providing Valuable Data on Design Maturity.

In Parallel, Assessment Studies, Including Representative Mock-Ups, Confirmed that Ambulance,

Command and Engineer Recce Roles Could be Delivered by Sub-System Installation on the Protected

Mobility Recce Support Vehicle. Assessment Studies Continued on Options for the Remaining Roles of Formation Recce (Overwatch), Joint Fires Command and Ground Base Surveillance Roles, Against the Existing User Requirements, to Determine Whether Incremental Upgrades are Required to Develop their Capability Further

Planning Round 12 Made a Number of Assumptions on Fleet Numbers \\\
The Follow on Recce Block 2 and 3 Assessment, and the Planning Assumption for Service Entry \\\, Pending Army 2020, Rebasing and Main Gate 2.

An Information Note Was Circulated in January 2013 to Provide a General Update with an Expectation that a Further Approval Update Would be Submitted Later in 2013.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Specialist Vehicles will Replace Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked) which is Increasingly Becoming Tactically Un-Deployable. Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked) Has Already Been Extended Beyond It's Out of Service Date Through a Series of Modifications and Urgent Operational Requirements. Combat Vehicles Reconnaissance (Tracked) is Restricted by Its Very Small Design Meaning that it Has Reached Its Operational Capacity. Combat Vehicles Reconnaissance (Tracked) Must be Replaced (by Specialist Vehicles) to Avoid a Long Term Capability Gap Opening Up in Essential Manned Ground Reconnaissance.

## A.6. Associated Projects - N/a

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="4">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">procurement Route</Td>
<td>approval Status</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 2 Demonstration</Td>
<td Colspan="3">acquisition Programme with Full and Open Competition</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture</Td>
<td Colspan="3">acquisition Programme with Full and Open Competition</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td Colspan="3">acquisition Programme with Full and Open Competition</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>general Dynamics UK Ltd</Td>
<td>demonstration to Manufacture</Td>
<td>the Contract is a Mixture of Firm, Maximum (to be Converted to Firm) and

Fixed Prices. the Firm

Prices Apply until 31 March 2015 and Thereafter Fixed Prices will Apply, with the Exception of the Demonstration Phase Activity which is Firm Price Regardless.</Td>
<td>competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 15%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="7">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="7"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
<td Colspan="5">
Not yet Committed. the Current Contract for Reconnaissance Block 1 and Common Base Platform Includes a Contract Option for an Initial in-Service Support Phase; this is for a Two Year Period from the Date that the Initial Operating Capability is Delivered. It is Currently Planned to Negotiate an Incentivised Support Solution During the Demonstration Phase to Come into Effect Following the Initial in-Service Support Phase.
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">first Two Years Support</Td>
<td>
General Dynamics UK
</Td>
<td>
Support
</Td>
<td>
Fixed Price
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">competitive - International</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>specialist Vehicles</Td>
<td>109</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>-27</Td>
<td>8%</Td>
<td>6%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>109</Td>
<td>82</Td>
<td>-27</Td>
<td>8%</Td>
<td>6%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Lowest Approved (£m)
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Approved (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>
1377
</Td>
<td>
1394
</Td>
<td>
1433
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 2 Demonstration</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>1394</Td>
<td>1394</Td>
<td>-0</Td>
<td>-0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 2 Demonstration</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>1394</Td>
<td>1394</Td>
<td>-0</Td>
<td>-0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - N/a

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>72</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>73</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>288</Td>
<td>91</Td>
<td>379</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>360</Td>
<td>92</Td>
<td>452</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>specialist Vehicles</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>continuous Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>march 2010</Td>
<td>21</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 2 Demonstration</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 2 Demonstration</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1 Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 Demonstration</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 2 Demonstration</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 1 &amp; 2 Manufacture</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>recce Block 3 Demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates - N/a

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation - N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - N/a

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Not Reported
</Td>
<td>
85 Green
</Td>
<td>the Project is Currently in Its Demonstration Phase and is Investigating How to Best Manage the Planning Round 12 Outcome Within the Overall Project Boundaries.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>system Verification (Contract Acceptance Against SRD)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>personnel Trained for Trials</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>in Service Support Solution Verified (Contract Acceptance in Accordance with ITEAP)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>infrastructure Solution Demonstrated in Accordance with ITEAP.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>personnel Solution Demonstrated in Accordance with the ITEAP.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>draft Concept of Use (CONUSE) Developed by Concepts &amp;
Doctrine (C&amp;D) from Equipment's Initial Baseline Solution (Initial B/L Sol ) and C&amp;D's Concept of Employment (CONEMP), Covering all Funded Platform Variants, with Gaps Between Funded CONUSE and CONEMP Fed Back to Capability's Capability Gap (CG).</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>organisation Solution Demonstrated in Accordance with the ITEAP.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>information Solution, Including Hardware, Software and Data Messages Required to Satisfy the Information Exchange Requirements, Has Been Successfully Verified Against the Systme Requirements and Design Spceification Through Analysis and Developmental Testing in Synthetic and Real- World Development Environments in Accordance with the Integrated Test, Evaluation &amp; Acceptance Plan (ITEAP)</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>8 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation - N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Specialist Vehicles

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1 Situational Awareness</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Gather and Use Information About the Operational Environment.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 2 Interoperability</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Operate National, and with Multinational, C4I Battlespace Systems</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 3 Deployability</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Deploy Rapidly Worldwide by Land, Sea and Air.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4 Operational Mobility</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Self Deploy a Total of 530 Km (300 Km by Road, 200 Km on Tracks and 30 Km Cross Country) on a Single Load of Fuel with the Appropriate Number of Personnel and Equipment According to Role, Ready to Complete a Battlefield Mission after Refuelling.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5 Tactical Mobility</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Achieve Levels of Terrain Accessibility and Agility Appropriate to Role.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6 Lethality</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Achieve the Defined Levels of Lethality Appropriate to Role.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 7 Survivability
</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Provided with the Defined Levels of Survivability Appropriate to Role.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 8 Sustainability</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Sustain Future Rapid Effect System Operational Effectiveness for National and Coalition Operations.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 9 Availability
</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Deliver High Levels of Operational Availability, for Durations of 14 Day High Intensity Warfighting Operation, with Minimum Maintenance.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 10 Environment</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Store, Transport and Operate the Capability Worldwide in all Relevant Operational Environments and Terrains.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 11 Growth Potential</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Develop the Capability of Future Rapid Effect System Through Life, Through the Ready Integration of Emerging Technologies.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>11 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>11 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation - N/a

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation - N/a
