---
year: 2008.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: FUTURE INTEGRATED SOLDIER TECHNOLOGY
page_from: 197.0
page_to: 200.0
project_label: Future Integrated Soldier Technology
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2008_197_200.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

| Picture not available. |
|----------------------------|

FUTURE INTEGRATED SOLDIER TECHNOLOGY

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

DISMOUNTED CLOSE COMBAT

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

The Future Integrated Soldier Technology programme aims to integrate both current and emerging key technologies that British dismounted soldiers require for them to maintain their position in the forefront of capability. The programme will ensure the future soldier has equipment that optimises effectiveness, reduces physical and psychological load, and minimises the effects of combat stress and the risks of human error.

Historically, soldiers have been equipped in a piecemeal manner. The programme will consider the dismounted soldier as a system, and the eight-man section as a virtual platform. This ‘system of systems’
approach, demonstrated successfully during the Concept Phase, will fundamentally improve the capabilities of troops engaged in dismounted close combat. It will deliver an integrated suite of equipment encompassing the NATO domains of Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Information, lethality, mobility, survivability and sustainability.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e Main Gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Initial Gate approval was achieved in August 2001. Four companies submitted tenders for the Assessment Phase prime contract, two of whom were selected to take part in a competitive planning phase starting in August 2002. The selection of Thales UK Ltd as the Assessment Phase prime contractor was announced on 12 March 2003.

A number of factors have caused the duration of the Assessment Phase to be extended. Critical trials planned for Summer 2004 were delayed by three months due to commitment of troops to operations overseas. Problems were encountered on a subsequent major trial held in Autumn 2005, as some systems proved to be short of the required levels of technical readiness and insufficiently robust to allow adequate data to be collected to inform the Main Gate Business Case. Consequently, more time was needed to mature our understanding of the requirement and of the final technical solution. Successful Combined Operational Effectiveness and Investment Appraisal trials followed and produced the required data. At the start of 2007/08 work on the main programme was suspended for five months (although the impact on the date of Main Gate was not commensurate) to allow Thales to deliver two Urgent Operational Requirements using technology arising out of Future Integrated Soldier Technology, which will provide an early benefit to troops engaged on current operations.

As a consequence of the problems experienced on the Autumn 2005 trials, an incremental procurement strategy has been adopted, allowing technology to be exploited as it matures, thereby de-risking the programme while not losing sight of the aim of an integrated suite of equipment. Each increment will have its own Main Gate approval, preceded by an Assessment Phase, meaning that there will be considerably more Assessment work overall in Future Integrated Soldier Technology than was forecast when only a single Main Gate was envisaged. The current Assessment Phase, now the Assessment Phase for the first increment, will include pre-Main Gate competitions at sub-system level for Surveillance and Target Acquisition and Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence, the results of which will be reflected in the Main Gate Business Cases. Thales are currently under contract until 31 December 2008. The first Main Gate Business Case, covering Surveillance and Target Acquisition, is forecast to be submitted in October 2008.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
142<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
26<a href="fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+116
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Represents total forecast cost for Assessment Phases 1-3.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
<li id="fn2">Approval for Assessment Phase 1 only. Due to the incremental nature of this programme, this approval does not include further Assessment Phases.<a href="fnref2" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>Latest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">The Future Integrated Soldier Technology project is intended to provide dismounted soldiers with an integrated suite of equipment that optimises their effectiveness on the battlefield. Soldiers have hitherto been equipped in a piecemeal manner, but Future Integrated Soldier Technology will regard the individual soldier as a system. A series of Main Gate Business Cases will be submitted for approval as elements of the work currently being carried out in the Assessment Phase reach maturity. The Main Gate Business Cases will seek approval for demonstration and production of a range of equipment to deliver the required capability.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
