---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance
Page_from: 371.0
Page_to: 378.0
Project_label: Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_371_378.md
---
FALSE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 64%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 3%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Joint Sensor and Engagement Networks
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>
Date Appointed
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Air Commodore Mark Hopkins (Air Capability)
</Td>
<td>27th April 2012</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Increment 1
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
The Requirement for Future Integrated Air Defence Includes Ground Based Command and Control, Surveillance and Weapons. This is a Defence Capability Priority, Driven by the Need to Counter the Future Air Threat. This will Evolve from Current Aircraft (Fixed Wing and Helicopters) to also Include Cruise Missiles, Unmanned Air Vehicles, Rockets, Artillery and Mortars. the Latter are Described as Difficult Air Targets. Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance is a Large and Complex Incremental Acquisition Programme, Currently in Assessment Phase for Increment 1. the Programme will Address the Capability Gap Described above by Providing a Capability to Compile and Distribute a Timely and Accurate Air Picture, Conduct Airspace Management to Allow Safe Operations and Defeat the Air Threat Throughout the Land Environment Area of Operations. the Three Increments are as Follows:-
Increment 1 Increment 1 will Replace Urgent Operational Requirement Equipment with an Enduring Counter Rocket Artillery &amp; Mortar Automated Sense and Warn Capability from 2015. This Capability is Being Used in Afghanistan to Protect UK Bases from Rocket Artillery and Mortar Attack. This Was Provided under Treasury Urgent Operation Requirement Funding. Automatic Sense and Warn Capabilities will be Brought into the Core Equipment Programme. Increment 2 Increment 2 will Deliver an Initial Counter-Unmanned Air Vehicle Capability and Replace the Existing Counter Rocket Artillery and Mortar Intercept Capability from 2017 as Well as Sustain Ground-Based Air Defence in the Falkland Islands Beyond 2020. Increment 3 Increment 3 will Improve Protection Against the Remainder of the Difficult Air Targets with Full Operating Capability Expected in 2027. the Difficult Air Targets Set Includes Cruise Missiles, Unmanned Air Vehicles, Attack Helicopters and

<sup>enter Text Here</sup>Rockets, Artillery and Mortars.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Approval for the Assessment Phase 1 Was Given by the MOD Investment Approvals Board in February 2010, and Ratified in June 2010 as Part of the Review by the New Coalition Government. the Objective of the Assessment Phase 1 is to Establish the Most Cost Effective Solution to the Increment 1 Requirement and Early De-Risking Activities for Increment 2. the Current Approval Covers Assessment Phase Work Required to Reach Main Gate 1, which Leads to the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase for Increment 1 and Effectively Increment 2 Initial Gate. the Assessment Phase Has Been Structured into Three Workstreams as Follows:

<ol Type="a">
<li>workstream 0. Initial De-Risking Activities will Identify and Address any Changes and Further Lessons Learnt as a Result of the Evolving Land Environment Air Picture Provision and Urgent Operational</Li>
</Ol>

Requirement Projects and Current Operations. Further Work will Develop the Architecture Required to Allow the Incremental Insertion of Capability over the Project Lifecycle. This will also Drive Coherence into Future Urgent Operational Requirement Activity and Address any Scaling Issues as a Result of the Defence Review.

<ol Start="2" Type="a">
<li>workstream 1. the Work Stream will Result in the Down Selection to a Single Affordable Option to be Presented at Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance Main Gate 1 to Deliver the Automated Sense and Warn Capability. a Full Option Analysis will be Undertaken to Investigate Retaining Extant Urgent Operational Requirement and Core Programme Components as Well as Alternative Off the Shelf Solutions.</Li>
<li>workstream 2. This Work Stream will Result in the Development of a Detailed System Architecture and Associated Systems and Technical Requirements and Initial Evaluation of Potential Equipment Options. It is Planned to De-Risk the Overall Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance Architecture, by Integrating Future Local Area Air Defence Systems (Land) and High Velocity Missile Models/ Equipments into a Representative Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance System and also Undertake an Initial Assessment of Counter-Rocket Artillery and Mortars Effectors.</Li>
</Ol>

In 2010, Associated with the Strategic Defence and Security Review a Number of Options Were Raised to

Enter Text Here Maintain Alignment with Wider Defence Priorities. These Were Primarily Associated with Scaling and Delivery Timings.

An Industry Day Was Held in November 2010, at which a Number of Companies Were Briefed on the Programme. Since then Industry Have Been Kept Informed of Developments via a Series of Newsletters. a Series of One to One Discussions with Industry on Increment 1 is Currently Being Conducted, Following the Request for Information for Increment 1.
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.3. in-Year Progress

As at 31 March 2012 the Project is Moving Steadily Forward to a Main Gate Submission in \\\. It Has Been Delayed Primarily Due to the MOD Wide Comprehensive Commitment Control Regime. This Delayed the Start of Several Key Tasks by Ten Months.

Good Progress Has Been Made However, Refining the Network Enabled Air Defence and Surveillance Increment 1 Requirement, and Starting the Operational Analysis to Provide Much of the Underlying Justification for the Main Gate Submission.

Engagement with Industry Continues, with a Series of One to One Discussions with Those Companies Who Have Expressed an Interest in Increment 1 Work.

## A.4. Capability Risks

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Successive Capability Audits Have Confirmed the Threat of Difficult Air Targets to the Land Environment (Including the Littoral) and in Particular from Rockets, Artillery and Mortars and Unmanned Air Vehicles. the UK Has Already Encountered the Rockets, Artillery and Mortar Threat on Current Operations and it is Highly Likely that the Threat to Land Forces will Become more Sophisticated and Challenging over Time. Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance will Counter the Difficult Air Targets Set with a Mix of Sensors, Command, Control, Communications and Shared Situational Awareness And, where Necessary, Effectors. Delivery is Aligned to Defence Priorities of Countering Rockets, Artillery, Mortar and Unmanned Air Vehicles and then the Remaining Threats as Well as Maintaining the Ground Based Air Defence Commitment to the Falkland Islands. Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance will Enhance Multi-National and Joint Integrated and Layered Air Surveillance and Defence Throughout and Contributes to Joint Fires Integration and Airspace Management. the March 2012 Single Statement of Need States that ‘as an Integrated Element of the Joint Force, the User Must be Able to Compile and Distribute a Timely and Accurate Air Picture, Conduct Airspace Management and Defeat the Air Threat Throughout the Land Area of Operations.’
Increment 1 will Replace Existing Counter Rocket Artillery &amp;
Mortar Automated Sense and Warn Urgent Operational Requirement Equipment with a Counter Rockets, Artillery and Mortars Enduring Capability from 2016. This Capability is Currently Being Used in Afghanistan to Protect UK Bases from Rocket Artillery and Mortar Attack. This Was Provided under Treasury Urgent Operational Requirement Funding. Automatic Sense and Warn Capabilities will be Brought into the Core Equipment Programme. not Taking Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance to Main Gate Would Delay the Implementation of a Core Automatic Sense and Warn Capability, Potentially Increasing Reliance on the Reserve for Additional Urgent Operational Requirement Activity to Maintain Support in Theatre.

Enter Text Here</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Title of Associated

Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>falcon</Td>
<td>december 2012</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Local Area Air Defence System (Land)</Td>
<td>november 2016</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project /
Increment Title
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Increment 1
</Td>
<td>
Competitive - UK
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
Where Possible Existing Support Equipment, Facilities and Practices will be Used to Minimise the Cost of Introducing Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance into Service. This will be Achieved by Applying Integrated Logistics Support Techniques During the Incremental Acquisition, Three Increment Approach. the Developed Support Solution(s) will be Cognisant of Those Support Solutions that are Already in Place for in-Service Equipment as Well as the Counter Rockets Artillery and Mortar, Automatic Sense and Warn Urgent Operational Requirement and the Incoming Land Equipment Air Picture Provision Equipment. the Aim will be to Minimise And, where Possible, Use Existing Support Assets and Facilities in Order to Reduce the Logistic Burden and Provide a Coherent Support Solution for the Network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance Programme Through Life.

Enter Text Here</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2">project/
Increment Title</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th Rowspan="2">
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Th>
<th Colspan="3">
Post-Main Investment
</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">
Approved Cost as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure Variation (£m) (%)</Th>
<th>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>9</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Forecast (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>2</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>
Forecast Date of Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1</Td>
<td>february 2010</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>increment 1</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicab

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>scale</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>7</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>1-10</Td>
<td>network Enabled Airspace Defence and Surveillance Increment 1 is Bringing Urgent Operational Requirement Capability into Core. the Combined Operational Effectiveness Investment Appraisal will Determine which Elements will be Retained as Part of the Increment 1 Solution. These Elements are at TRL9. Alternative Candidate Components Identified Through the Request for Information will Only be Considered if They are Proven to be at Least TRL7 in Line with Guidelines Laid Down in the Acquisition Operating Framework for Main Gate.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable
