---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Gate
Project: MARITIME, AIRBORNE, SURVEILLANCE and CONTROL
Page_from: 211.0
Page_to: 212.0
Project_label: Maritime, Airborne, Surveillance & Control (MASC)
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_211_212.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

MARITIME, AIRBORNE,

SURVEILLANCE and CONTROL

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE AIRCRAFT CARRIER

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Carrier Strike Senior Responsible Owner.

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the REQUIREMENT

The Requirement is to Continue the Provision of Airborne Surveillance and Battle Management Capability for Carrier Strike (Delivery of Full Offensive Air Effort, at Medium Scale, from the Sea) as Currently Achieved by the Sea King Mk7 Airborne Surveillance and Control Variant. This Capability will Support Naval Operations and Shipping, Especially the Future Aircraft Carrier; and Land Operations in Littoral Regions, E.g. Amphibious Landings. the System will Conduct Surveillance of Air and Surface Targets, with the Concurrent Battle Management Capability Allowing the Command of Assigned Assets Such as Future UK Joint Combat Aircraft. This Capability Enables the Protection of UK Assets from Attack and Enhances the Ability to Conduct Offensive Operations.

The Initial Gate Submitted in 2005 Sought Approval for Stage 1 of the Assessment Phase Only. This Stage Completed in 2007 and a Review Note is Being Developed which will Confirm the Way Forward for the Programme.

205

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-Service Dates and Costs are not Set until Projects Reach the Point in Time when the Main Investment Decision is Made i.e. Main Gate Approval. Until this Point all Costs and Dates are Outline Assumptions Solely for Internal Planning Purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Assessment Phase Stage 1 Studied a Focused Set of Solutions Having Deselected a Number at Initial Gate. It Helped Develop a Comprehensive Understanding of the Technical Risk Issues Associated with Each Solution and How These Impact on the Ability to Deliver the Capability, an Understanding of the Relative Costs and Effectiveness of the Solutions in Meeting the Capability and a Programme for the Remainder of the Assessment Phase. This Work also Considered the Ability to Deliver this Capability Within the Wider Context of Ministry of Defence's Investment in Surveillance Platforms and Infrastructure, and Explored Opportunities for Cost Effective Delivery Through an Incremental Approach to Acquisition. This Included an Assessment of Extending the Service of the Current Sea King Mk7 Aircraft Coupled with a Later Adoption of a New Airframe and Mission System Combination, as Opposed to the Previous Programme Assumption for the Transfer of the Sea King Mk7 Mission System to a New Build Rotary Wing Airframe.

Stage 1 Was Approved at an Expected Cost of £10m and a not to Exceed Cost of £13m. the Risks Associated with the not to Exceed Costs Have not Occurred Resulting in a Variation of -£3m. a Further Variation of
-£2m is Due to an Innovative Contracting Structure that Has Allowed Studies to be Conducted more Cost Effectively. the Remaining Variation of -£1m is as a Result of Revaluing Assessment Phase 1.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
7
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
13
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-6
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Explanation of the Need and Boundaries of Current Internal Planning Assumptions for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>earliest</Th>
<th>latest</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability will be Available</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">the MASC Initial Operating Capability is to Provide a Minimum Deployable Force Capable of Providing 24 Hour Surveillance Cover to Protect the Future Aircraft Carrier Task Group. the Date Entries are Nominal, Pending Definition of the Final in-Service Date at the Point of Commitment to the Development and Manufacture Stage.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2d. Boundaries of Current Internal Cost Assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

206
