---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Core Production Capability
Page_from: 90.0
Page_to: 98.0
Project_label: Core Production Capability
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_90_98.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 53%" />
<col Style="Width: 26%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Core Production Capability
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Nuclear Propulsion Project Team
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Commodore R Stokes
</Td>
<td>01 June 2012</Td>
<td>01 October 2016</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Core Production Capability
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

To Maintain a Naval Reactor Core Production Capability (CPC) to Support the UK’s Nuclear Submarine Flotilla. All Royal Navy Submarine Propulsion Nuclear Reactor Cores Have Been Manufactured at the Rolls-Royce (RR) Raynesway Site.

To Conduct Nuclear Operations on the Raynesway Site, Rolls-Royce Marine Power Operations Limited is ‘licensed’ Formally by the Health and Safety Executive (Office for Nuclear Regulation) (HSE(ONR)) as Required by the Nuclear Installations Act.

The Technological and Manufacturing Capability to Produce Submarine Reactor Cores Has Traditionally Been Sustained Through Successive Contracts for their Production. with the Introduction of Long Life Cores and the Reduction in the Submarine Flotilla Size the Numerical Requirement for Cores Has Reduced.

The Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) White Paper Deferred the in-Service Date (ISD) for the Successor SSBN to 2028 with a 36 Month Drumbeat.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

In September 2007, the Investment Appraisals Board Approved the CPC Initial Gate Business Case, to Down Select to the Phased Regeneration of the Rolls-Royce Raynesway Site, as the Most Cost Effective Way of Delivering the Capability.

The Assessment Phase Contract Was Let on 13th February 2008. This Contract Covered Assessment Phase Work Up to February 2010.

The Interim Contract Was Placed on 4th February 2010 to Cover the Work Required to Complete Assessment Phase Activities Up to Placement of the Main Phase Contract on 23rd April 2012. in January 2012 the IAC Approved the Review Note Requesting Release of Funding Against the Main Gate Business Case.

## A.3. Project History

April 2012: HMT Approved the CPC Main Gate Business Case.

April 2012: Placement of the Main Phase CPC Contract.

May 2012: IAC Approval of Main Gate Business Case.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

May 2012 to January 2013: Construction Contract Tender Evaluation.

November 2012: Following the Licensed Site Periodic Safety Review (PSR), the Health and Safety

Executive’s (HSE) Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) Concluded that Normal Operation of the Licensed Site can Continue Whilst a Programme of Work to Implement a Number of Improvements is Progressed.

December 2012: Rolls-Royce Place Contract with Sub-Contractor CH2MHILL to Provide the Project Support.

January 2013: Rolls-Royce Place Contract for Construction with Graham Construction. Work Commenced on Site. the Demolition of Nuclear Manufacturing Services Was Completed in January 2013 in Preparation for the Start of Phase 1.

March 2013: Demolition of the Operations Management Centre Was Completed.

May 2013: Manufacturing Facility 1st Build (MF1B) Piling Commenced.

Cores Have Been Delivered in-Year to Support the Submarine Programme.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Delivery of the CPC Project is Essential in Order to Maintain the Capability to Manufacture Nuclear Reactor Cores for the Submarine Programme and Support Development Work on the Successor Core Design and Manufacturing Processes.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>successor (Incl Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant)</Td>
<td>isd of 2028</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>isd of 2018 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td>post-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>isd of 2020 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td>post-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>isd of 2022 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td>post-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>isd of 2024 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td>post-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project / Increment Title
</Th>
<th>contractor</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>procurement Route</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>rolls-Royce</Td>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>target Cost Incentive Fee</Td>
<td>single Source</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="5">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">the CPC Contract Procures a Capability to Manufacture Nuclear Reactor Cores for Astute and Successor. the Support Strategy is Embeded in the CPC Procurement Strategy.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>10%</Td>
<td>10%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>10%</Td>
<td>10%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>
1128
</Td>
<td>
1190
</Td>
<td>
1272
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>1176</Td>
<td>1110</Td>
<td>-66</Td>
<td>-30</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>1176</Td>
<td>1110</Td>
<td>-66</Td>
<td>-30</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1 Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Core Production Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>-4</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>this Reflects Reduction in the Risk Management Provision. Although it Appears that ~£10m Might not be Needed, ~£6m is Required to Make Provision for Unforeseen Issues.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
February 2013
</Td>
<td>-26</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>this Reflects Price Reduction Following Negotiations with Rolls Royce.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-36</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>variation Due to the Later than Planned Contract Start.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-66</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2 Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>107</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>73</Td>
<td>73</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>73</Td>
<td>180</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

In May 2012, the Investment Approvals Committee Approved £1190 Million as the Cost of the D&M Phase. This Includes £14 Million which Was Subsequently Advanced into the Assessment Phase in Order to Continue the Programme Whilst Contact Negotiations Were Finalised and Has Been Accounted for as a Cost to the Assessment Phase.

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>
September 2007
</Td>
<td>may 2012</Td>
<td>56</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for Full Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
May 2021
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>full Operating Capability Definition</Td>
<td Colspan="3"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
Full Operating Capability
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td Colspan="3">ability to Manufacture a Core Through the New Facility</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C.3

# C.3.1

## C.3.2 Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>may 2021</Td>
<td>august 2021</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
<td>+3</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3 Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Core Production Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>
Category
</Th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
April 2012
</Td>
<td>
+3
</Td>
<td>procurement Processes</Td>
<td>delay in Placing Main Gate Contract Due to Negotiations with Rolls Royce</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
3
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.4 Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation - N/a

## C.3.5 Operational Impact of Full Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>nil. Opportunities are Being Progressed to Bring the Forecast Date for FOC to Schedule.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - See Above

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
94%
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>very High Confidence - Note: CPC Did not Begin Reporting on Sentinel until Mid 2012.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>
Not Met /

Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>production of Cores for the Astute Class and Successor.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>trained Personnel to Enable Equipment DLOD.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>maintenance of a Nuclear Site Licence.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>facilities to Manufacture Cores.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>maintenance of a Nuclear Site Licence.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>maintenance of a Nuclear Site Licence.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>maintenance of a Nuclear Site Licence.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
7 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.2 Defence Line of Development Variation - N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1 Core Production Capability

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>
Related Defence

Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>the USER Shall be Supplied with a Core Production

Capability that can

Produce Cores that Comply with Astute and Successor Specifications.</Td>
<td>
All DLODs Except

Doctrine</Td>
<td>supply of Astute and Successor SSBN Reactor Cores - Must Provide Reactor Cores to the Specification Defined by the Astute and Successor Programmes, and which Must be of Sufficient Quality to Satisfy the NSRP Technical Authority, the Naval Reactor Plant Authorisee (NRPA), and MoD Nuclear Regulator:
DNSR.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>the USER Shall be Supplied with Cores According to the Submarine Programme</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the Intention to Renew the Deterrent Platform Was Stated in Defence White Paper “the Future of the United Kingdom’s Nuclear Deterrent”. the White Paper Was Endorsed by Parliamentary Vote Early 2007. the Provision of Cores Aligned with the Submarine Build Programme Reduces the Storage Requirement and Ensures that Approvals are Aligned with Platform Requirements</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>2 (0)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation - N/a

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation - N/a
