---
year: 2008.0
project_type: post-main gate
project: NIMROD MARITIME RECONNAISSANCE AND ATTACK MK4
page_from: 103.0
page_to: 116.0
project_label: Nimrod MRA4
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2008_103_116.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

NIMROD MARITIME

RECONNAISSANCE AND ATTACK MK4

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

NIMROD MARITIME RECONNAISSANCE AND ATTACK (MRA4)

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Under Water Effect)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE PROJECT

## 1a. Project description, progress and key future events

The Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 will replace the current Nimrod

Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK2 as the new maritime patrol aircraft. Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 will provide significantly enhanced Anti-Submarine and AntiSurface Warfare capability through improved aircraft and sensor performance, a greater degree of system integration, better Human Machine Interface design and a substantial improvement in availability and supportability.

The Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 contract for the design, development and production of 21 aircraft was placed with BAE Systems (then BAe) in 1996, following an international competition. The contract was re-negotiated in mid 1999 and again in early 2002 –
when the Department reduced the number of aircraft from 21 to 18. Continued technical and resource problems led to a further review of the programme and in February 2003 the Department reached an agreement with BAE Systems to change the fixed price contract to a Target Cost Incentive Fee contract for Design and Development, which included manufacture of three trials aircraft, and an option for a further fifteen production aircraft. Pending definition of a satisfactory design standard, series production activities were limited to those activities vital to the preservation of the essential skill sets within BAE Systems and its supply chain. Flight trials are underway with all three aircraft.

In July 2004, studies determined that the capability of the Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 would enable maritime reconnaissance requirement to be met with a fleet of about 12 aircraft and the number to be procured has been reduced accordingly. A further review of the programme identified increased production costs and that the In-Service Date for the capability would need to be delayed in order to make the programme affordable within Departmental funding constraints. A business case seeking authorisation of commitment to full production was approved in May 2006, and the contract was amended to re-introduce the production requirements in July 2006. As part of the approval process the project’s original Key Requirements were redefined and endorsed as Key User Requirements by the Investment

Approval Board and a revised definition of the In-Service Date was approved. The Initial Gate Business Case for the Assessment Phase of Future Support was approved in May 2005 with Main Gate submission now expected around mid 2008.

## 1b. Associated projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Critical to Achievement of ISD</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
<td>Project Title</td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 1c. Procurement strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Contractor(s)</th>
<th>Contract Scope</th>
<th>Contract Type</th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>BAE Systems, Warton</td>
<td>Design and Development</td>
<td>Target Cost Incentive Fee<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></td>
<td>Prime Contractor International competition</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BAE Systems, Warton</td>
<td>Production</td>
<td>Target Cost Incentive Fee<sup>1</sup></td>
<td>Prime Contractor</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Originally let as a fixed price contract.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance against approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
3602<sup></sup>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Main Gate</td>
<td>
2813
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+789
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+102
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2b. Reasons for variation from approved cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>July 2007</td>
<td>+102</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Costs of converting the 3 development aircraft to the production standard. (+£50m). Extension of the Flight Trials Programme (+£20m). Embodiment of the Stability Augmentation System (+£20m). Associated increase in Cost of Capital (+£12m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-370</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>Woodford under-recovery of overhead double counted in EP07 as already included in Company cost forecast (-£7m). An adjustment of the Historic calculation of the Cost of Capital charge (-£32m). Increase in costs owing to the creation of a trading fund for the Communications Electronic Security Group after original approval had been granted (+£1m); derivation of the approved cost on a resource basis (-£19m). Change to take account of an adjustment to the current forecast for MPR01, reflecting the availability of more accurate data (+£29m). Changes caused by the conversion of internal accounting system to full resource basis (-£26m). Difference in variation due to revision of Cost of Capital charge (-£22m). Departmental Review - identified savings with a reclassification of termination spares expenditure (-£176m) and</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

^\^ ^\]^ For consistency with previous MPRs this figure includes a notional £35m for the Active Search Sonobuoy System (ASSS) which formed part of the original Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 approval, all of which was subsequently transferred out of the Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 programme. Re-approval was not sought because of the materiality of the comparatively low value involved, but the £35m remains within programme costs to ensure a neutral impact in comparability between approval and forecast.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>resulting reduction in Cost of Capital charge (-£35m). Departmental Review identified savings from reduced Cost of Capital charge from early delivery to the customer (-£69m). Departmental Review – identified savings from reclassification of Adaptable Aircraft costs (-£4m) and reclassification of Consumable Stock (-£7m). MPR05 transposition error (-£3m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-27</td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</td>
<td>Reduction in Risk provision (MPR00 -£17m; MPR02 -£17m). Contractor forecast was greater than advised in MPR05 resulting in increased Cost of Capital charge (+£7m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-80</td>
<td>Changed Requirement</td>
<td>Reduction from 18 aircraft to 12 (-£155m) and associated reduction in Cost of Capital Charge (-£10m). Reduction from 21 to 18 aircraft; MPR02 saving of £114m less estimated termination costs of
£70m; MPR03 further savings identified in 2003 planning process (-£16m). Additional commitments as part of the Heads of Agreement (+£35m). Additional costs for assessment of enhanced capability as part of the Agreement announced on 19 February 2003 (+£10m). As a consequence of the Agreement, QinetiQ requirement extended (+£40m). Reduction in cost of assessment of enhanced capability (-£5m). Contract change requirements (+£70m). Reduction in Government Furnished Equipment requirement (-£5m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+24</td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</td>
<td>Reduction in Risk provision (-£56m); and reductions following the renegotiation of contract (-£26m); reduction in programme costs between Main Gate approval and original contract placement (-£37m); original contract was let at provisional indices that were below actual indices (+£16m). Additional costs relating to the agreement</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>announced on 19 February 2003 for Design and Development Target Cost Fee (+£132m). Increased cost in light of company contract quality price for production and associated analysis of revised costing for October 2005 Investment Approvals Board Review Note (+£70m). Overhead recoveries (+£14m), Initial Logistics Support (+£8m), VAT liability on Design
&amp; Development support (+£5m), Increase to Management Reserve identified in the Departmental Review (+£5m). Departmental Review –
identified savings from a reclassification of overheads (-£11m), reduction of contractor fee and production costs (-£10m), provision for reduced spares (-£13m), VAT exemption (-£33m), reductions for Initial Logistics Support (-£8m), reduced manpower requirements (-£22m), cancellation of spares (-£3m), and reduced Cost of Capital charge (-£7m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+41</td>
<td>Inflation</td>
<td>Variation in Inflation assumptions (+£41m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>-7</td>
<td>Receipts</td>
<td>Forecast recovery of Liquidated Damages (-£46m) less those to be foregone as part of the Agreement announced on 19 February 2003 (+£39m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+1,106</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Interest on Capital recalculated based upon Equipment Plan 07 profile and reduction in Management Reserve (-£4m). Review of EP07 estimates &amp; schedule as a result of risk realisation Stability Augmentation System/Stall Identification Device has led to increased coherence in the programme resulting in a lower requirement for Management Reserve (-£5m). Increased Production Cost (+£229m) and increased Cost of Capital Charge linked to cost change and delay in delivery programme (+£183m). Increase in Defence Evaluation and Research Agency estimate</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Date
</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>
Factor
</td>
<td>
Explanation
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>(+£13m). Reduction in the study requirements (-£6m); slower technical progress than originally envisaged, particularly with wing mass, leading to reduced Cost of Capital charge (-£9m). Reduced Cost of Capital charge linked to reduction in aircraft numbers (-£2m); additional costs relating to the Agreement of February 2003 (+£359m). Increased Programme costs (+£348m).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Net Variation
</td>
<td>
+789
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</th>
<th>
3,007
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of peak procurement expenditure</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2002/2003
</td>
<td>
2004/2005
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2e. Unit production cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Unit Production Cost (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">
Quantities Required
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>Current</td>
<td>at Main Gate</td>
<td>
Current
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Development and Production Package</td>
<td>Development and Production Package</td>
<td>21</td>
<td>
12
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 78%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>ISD Definition:</th>
<th>
Original ISD Definition: Delivery of 7th production standard aircraft to Royal Air Force. MPR04 Definition: (Part of the 19th February 2003 Agreement with the Company): Delivery of the sixth production standard aircraft to the Royal Air Force. Reason for Change: To reflect the reduction in the fleet from 21 to 18 agreed in 2002; six aircraft represents one squadron. MPR07 Definition: Provision of 5 aircraft (4 deployable) and 6 combat ready crews. Reason for Change: Secretary of State announced in July 2004, post Medium-Term Work Strand studies, a reduction in the number of Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 aircraft to be procured from 18 to about 12.
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3b. Performance against approved in-service date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Date
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Current Forecast ISD</td>
<td>
December 2010
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>
April 2003
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation (Months)</td>
<td>
+92
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-year changes</td>
<td>
+3
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3c. Reasons for variation from approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Variation (months)
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>
Explanation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>June 2007</td>
<td>+3</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Manufacturing Phase extended as a consequence of essential changes emerging from the Flight Trials.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+89</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>To make overall programme affordable within Departmental funding constraints (MPR05 +12 months). Resource and Technical factors at BAE Systems leading to programme slippage: MPR00 +23 months MPR02 +11 months MPR03 +40 months MPR04 +6 months Difference between forecast date reported in MPR99 based on 1999 re-approval at 90% confidence and forecast date reported in MPR00 based on the current plan at 50% confidence (-3 months).</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Net Variation</td>
<td>+92</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3d. Cost resulting from ISD variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Type of Cost/Saving</th>
<th>Cost £m</th>
<th>Saving £m</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Support costs of current equipment</td>
<td>344</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>
Additional costs of running on Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK2
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Other</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>150</td>
<td>
Reduction in Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 support costs in same period
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>+194</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3e. Operational impact of ISD variation

The consequence of the Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 ISD slip is that either the Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK2 would remain in service beyond the current out-of-service date of March 2011 or a capability gap will be endured. This slip will delay introduction of the improved capability of the Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 and could require the ageing Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK2 fleet to be maintained in service longer than expected. The operational impact of this slippage will be partly mitigated by measures already in hand to introduce upgrades to some Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK2 systems. Notably the Acoustic Suite AQS 971, navigation systems, data links and other communications will address interoperability issues. The Acoustic Suite programme has benefited by making use of acoustic processors procured for Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 Acoustic Suite AQS 970 programme.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4 is a legacy project and its original approval did not include Key Requirements. The Key Requirements reported to date in the Major Project Report were retrospectively agreed between Director of Equipment Capability (Under Water Environment) and Nimrod Integrated Project Team Leader. Before endorsement was sought, it was discovered that these Key Requirements were not compliant with the latest Smart Acquisition guidelines. Consequently, new Key User Requirements were developed from first principles to comply with the latest guidelines and endorsed by the Investment Approvals Board in June 2006.

## 4a. Performance against approved key user requirements

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Forecast to be

Met
</th>
<th>
At Risk
</th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td>
Maritime Counter Terrorism
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td>
Search &amp; Detect (Under Water Effect)
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td>
Submarine Attack
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td>
Search &amp; Detect (Above Water Environment)
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td>
Tactical Interoperability
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td>
Mission Completion
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td>
Maritime Presence
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
08
</td>
<td>
Operations in Hostile Environment
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
09
</td>
<td>
Environmental Operating Conditions
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
100 %
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2">
0
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 4b. Reasons for variation against approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>April 2008</td>
<td>KUR 01</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Solutions to problems related to Electronic Support Measures, Radar and Electro Optical Surveillance Detection System will be resolved within the Design &amp; Development programme. The Contractor has an active recovery programme in place which is reviewed on a monthly basis. Additionally, further technical issues could emerge as more of the systems start to be operated together. Overall, there is a high probability that the KUR will be classified as on track by ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>April 2008</td>
<td>KUR 02</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Solutions to problems</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>related to Electronic Support Measures, Radar and Electro Optical Surveillance Detection System will be resolved within the Design &amp;
Development programme. The Contractor has an active recovery programme in place which is reviewed on a monthly basis. Additionally, further technical issues could emerge as more of the systems start to be operated together. Overall, there is a high probability that the KUR will be classified as on track by ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>April 2008</td>
<td>KUR 03</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Solutions to problems related to Electronic Support Measures, Radar and Electro Optical Surveillance Detection System will be resolved within the Design &amp; Development programme. The Contractor has an active recovery programme in place which is reviewed on a monthly basis. Additionally, further technical issues could emerge as more of the systems start to be operated together. Overall, there is a high probability that the KUR will be classified as on track by ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>February 2008</td>
<td>KUR 04</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Required Mission System performance may not be assured prior to ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>April 2008</td>
<td>KUR 06</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Solutions to problems related to Electronic Support Measures, Radar and Electro Optical Surveillance Detection System will be resolved within the Design &amp; Development programme. The Contractor has an active recovery programme in place which is reviewed on a monthly basis.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 32%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>Additionally, further technical issues could emerge as more of the systems start to be operated together. Overall, there is a high probability that the KUR will be classified as on track by ISD.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>April 2008</td>
<td>KUR 08</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>The Electronic Warfare Rig procurement is proceeding ahead of its contracted timescales. However, the commissioning of the new facility at the Thomson Building at Royal Air Force Waddington, which combines the A400M facility requirement, is currently several months behind schedule;
Defence Estates will provide a full 3point estimate for the build programme in May 2008. Electronic Support Measure and Radar issues are being addressed; see comments against KUR 1. Defensive Aids Sub System has 3 identified issues which require planning and funding. The KUR is considered at risk, since satisfaction of KUR 8 will be determined by the environment in which the fleet operates. Any additional requirements such as use/types of flares etc will be new requirements and will need to attract discrete funding for both equipment and for the extension of the programme.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>August 2007</td>
<td>KUR 08</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Electronic Warfare Rig on contract with effect from 30 September 2006. Delivery expected January 2010 (50%), March 2010 (90%); BAE Systems have been incentivised to deliver within 2009 to meet Air Warfare Centre’s requirement for a rig</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date</td>
<td>
Key Requirement
</td>
<td>Factor</td>
<td>Explanation</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>availability 12 months prior to In Service Date. Recognition of assessment of KUR has been agreed with Nimrod Capability Working Group.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>KUR 08</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>Technical and financial issues now resolved surrounding procurement of Electronic Warfare Rig thereby allowing aircraft to operate with a self-defence capability. Business Case with Investment Appraisal under compilation. Procurement schedule being determined; anticipate KUR compliance when schedule and risks clearly identified.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP TO MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

In November 1992, the Equipment Approvals Committee approved a Request for Information exercise whereby 17 companies were invited to provide responses to the draft Replacement Maritime Patrol Aircraft Staff Requirement. Following analysis of the industry responses, the Equipment Approvals Committee endorsed the requirement and approved an Invitation to Tender phase whereby four companies (BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin, Loral and Dassault) were invited to provide detailed technical and commercial proposals for an aircraft to meet the endorsed Staff Requirement. Dassault withdrew from the competition in January 1996, and whilst Lockheed Martin and Loral merged in May 1996, they maintained the two separate proposals until the competition concluded. Following assessment of these responses, selection of BAE Systems’ Nimrod 2000 (later to be re-designated Nimrod Maritime Reconnaissance and Attack MK4) offer was approved by Equipment Approvals Committee and Ministers in July 1996. This was the equivalent of Main Gate approval.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (outturn prices)       | Assessment Phase cost | Proportion of total estimated procurement expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | 5                         | 0.1%                                                      |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | 4                         | 0.1%                                                      |
| Variation                     | +1                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Date of Main Gate Approval</td>
<td>
July 1996
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Date of Initial Gate Approval</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Length of Assessment Phase [months]</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5d. Cost boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (outturn prices)</th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Highest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase forecast at Main Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>2813</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expected envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 5e. ISD boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>
Budgeted For
</th>
<th>Latest Acceptable</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast ISD at Main Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>April 2003</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability was expected to be available at Initial Gate</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

INTENTIONALLY BLANK
