---
year: 2007.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: MARITIME, AIRBORNE, SURVEILLANCE, AND CONTROL (MASC)
page_from: 191.0
page_to: 192.0
project_label: Maritime, Airborne, Surveillance & Control (MASC)
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2007_191_192.md
---
PRE-MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

MARITIME, AIRBORNE,

SURVEILLANCE, AND

CONTROL (MASC)

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE AIRCRAFT CARRIER (CVF)

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Carrier Strike Senior Responsible Owner.

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

The provision of an airborne surveillance and battle management capability, as currently achieved by the Sea King Mk7 Airborne Surveillance and Control variant (SKASaC), to support Carrier Strike. Surveillance will be conducted of air and surface targets which, with command of assigned assets, will enable protection of the Joint Sea Base and support to Carrier Strike offensive air power as well as Littoral Manoeuvre operations.

The Initial Gate submitted in 2005 sought approval for Stage 1 of the Assessment Phase only. A Review Note planned for mid 2007 will outline the forward programme and identify the full cost of the Assessment Phase.

185

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e. Main gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Assessment Phase Stage 1 is aimed at studying a focussed set of solutions having deselected a number at Initial Gate. The outcome of this will be threefold. Firstly, a comprehensive understanding of the technical risk issues associated with each solution and how these impact on the ability to deliver the capability. Secondly, an understanding of the relative costs and effectiveness of the solutions in meeting the capability. Finally, Stage 1 will deliver a programme for the remainder of the Assessment Phase that articulates what level of funding is required and what level of risk reduction is necessary to reach Main Gate.

Stage 1 was approved at an expected cost of £10m and a Not To Exceed cost of £13m. The risks associated with the Not To Exceed costs have not occurred resulting in a variation of -£3m. A further variation of
-£2m is due to an innovative contracting structure that has allowed studies to be conducted more cost effectively. The remaining variation of -£1m is as a result of revaluing Assessment Phase 1.

As part of the Assessment Phase Stage 1 activity, the project team are considering the ability to deliver this capability within the wider context of MoD’s investment in surveillance platforms and infrastructure as well as the opportunities for cost effective delivery through an incremental approach to acquisition. This has the potential to change the nature of the programme from the planning assumption which is based on the transfer of the existing Sea King Mk7 mission system to a new build rotary wing airframe.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
7
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
13
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-6
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Latest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">The MASC initial operating capability is to provide a minimum deployable force capable of providing 24 hour surveillance cover to protect the Future Aircraft Carrier (CVF) Task group. The date entries are nominal, pending definition of the final In-service date at the point of commitment to the Development and Manufacture stage.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

186
