---
year: 2009.0
project_type: Post-Main Investment Decision Projects
project: Future Joint Combat Aircraft
page_from: 156.0
page_to: 165.0
project_label: Joint Combat Aircraft (Lightning II)
project_type_label: D&M Phase
filenm: naomprss_2009_156_165.md
---
Future Joint Combat Aircraft

Project

Joint Combat Aircraft

Team Responsible

Joint Combat Aircraft Team

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Head of Capability (Deep Target Attack)

Senior Responsible Officer

Head of Capability (Deep Target Attack) (Combat Air Senior Responsible Officer)

Number of Projects / Increments 2

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Post Main Investment Decision - System Development and Demonstration, Production Sustainment and Follow on Development

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

Following UK participation in the Concept Demonstration Phase of the programme, the United States

Joint Strike Fighter was selected to meet the Joint Combat Aircraft requirement. The Strategic Defence Review confirmed this requirement to provide the UK with a replacement for the Royal Navy Sea Harrier and the Royal Air Force Harrier GR7/9. A tailored Main Gate Demonstration approval was obtained in January 2001 for participation in the System Development and Demonstration phase to the value of £1,300M, along with
£600M for related non-System Development and Demonstration work, leading to signature that month by UK and United States governments of the System Development and Demonstration Memorandum of Understanding. The selection of Lockheed Martin as the Joint Strike Fighter air system prime contractor included a teaming agreement with Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems to collectively form Team Joint Strike Fighter. Two separate and competitive propulsion contracts were awarded to Pratt and Witney for the F135 engine and General Electric/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team for the F136 engine. Whilst other partners joined the programme at Level 2 and 3 entry arrangements, only United States and UK requirements drive the System Development and Demonstration baseline solution.

In September 2002 the UK selected the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Joint Strike Fighter variant to meet our requirement. A review of the Joint Strike Fighter Programme and the viability of the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design was completed in January 2005 and concluded that a successful programme of weight reduction initiatives and other performance enhancements had restored confidence that the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing design should remain the UK’s planning assumption. A further review by the Investment Approvals Board in July 2006 confirmed this decision.

On 12 December 2006 Minister of State for Defence Procurement signed the Production Sustainment and Follow-on Development Memorandum of Understanding representing the first of four further Main Gates planned for the introduction of Joint Combat Aircraft into service. The UK has approval for Phase 2 of the Joint Combat Aircraft incremental strategy where the UK will participate in the joint Initial Operational Test &
Evaluation with the United States. This will allow the UK to continue to influence all aspects of the Joint Strike Fighter programme as it moves into a new phase.

Two Key Performance Measures remain at risk:

KPM04 - Mission Performance: In July 2006 the Investment Approvals Board directed that Ship-borne Rolling and Vertical Landing should be included in future development of the Joint Combat Aircraft design to mitigate the risk to the Vertical Land Bring Back capability.

KPM06 – Logistic Footprint: Performance remains marginally better than requirement, although due to very narrow margin this KUR remains at risk. Work is ongoing with Lockheed Martin to drive down Logistic Footprint to ensure it remains within specification as the air system matures throughout the System Development and Demonstration phase.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

Approval was obtained in November 1996 to enter the Concept Demonstration Phase on the Joint Strike Fighter programme under a Memorandum of Understanding signed in December 1995. The phase began in November 1996 with two competing United States Prime Contractors (Boeing and Lockheed Martin) designing weapons systems and flying demonstration aircraft on which the selection of the preferred bidder was based. The phase completed in October 2001 with the announcement of Lockheed Martin as the successful bidder. Studies into alternative options to Joint Strike Fighter to meet the requirement were also conducted but were rejected on cost effective grounds. The options were US F/A18E aircraft, French Rafale M, a “navalised” Eurofighter and an advanced Harrier.

## A.3. Progress

The flight test programme is progressing with the first Conventional Take Off and Landing and the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing Variants achieving first flight and in excess of 70 plus test flights to date. The UK has received certification, supported by analysis from the United States and other independent subject matter experts, that the Short Take Off and Vertical Landing propulsion system is approved to fly throughout the current design environment (conventional and vertical). On 18 March 2009 the UK Secretary of State for Defence announced the approval for the UK to purchase three Short Take Off and Vertical Landing variants of Joint Strike Fighters which will allow the UK to participate in the Operational Test and Evaluation of Joint Strike Fighter along with the United States services.

## A.4. Capability Risks

This capability provides the UK with an expeditionary air to ground and air to air capability to satisfy the Strategic Defence Review of 1998 in order to maintain the Carrier Strike capability for the UK. Without this capability the UK will not have the ability to launch air power from both land and sea at a time and place of our choosing.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 44%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2">
Critical to achievement of IOC
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</th>
<th>
Forecast IOC
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
Queen Elizabeth Class (Future Aircraft Carrier)
</td>
<td>
2016 and 2018
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="4">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project
</td>
<td colspan="3">
-
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Joint Combat Aircraft
</td>
<td>
Lockheed Martin
</td>
<td>
System Development and Demonstration
</td>
<td>
Cost plus award fee, subject to a maximum price.
</td>
<td>Competitive International collaboration procurement. UK participation through Memorandum of Understanding agreement. (Note: the contract is placed by the US Department of Defense with Lockheed Martin.)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy – not applicable

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a proportion of total

estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>System Development and Demonstration</td>
<td>150</td>
<td>144</td>
<td>-6</td>
<td>6.1%</td>
<td>5.9%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production Sustainment and Follow on Development</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Assessment Phase/PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>System Development and Demonstration</td>
<td>
1971
</td>
<td>
2034
</td>
<td>
2236
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production Sustainment and Follow on Development</td>
<td>
504
</td>
<td>
638
</td>
<td>
638
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 46%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th>
Actual /

Forecast cost (£m)</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>
In-Year Variation (£m)
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>System Development and Demonstration</td>
<td>
2236
</td>
<td>
1813
</td>
<td>
-423
</td>
<td>
- 21
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Production Sustainment and Follow on Development</td>
<td>
638
</td>
<td>
638
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td>
0
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total</td>
<td>
2874
</td>
<td>
2451
</td>
<td>
-423
</td>
<td>
-21
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### B.3.1. Cost Variation against approved Cost of the D&M Phase

### B.3.1.1. System Development and Demonstration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Variation (£m)</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>January 2009</td>
<td>+6</td>
<td>
Foreign Exchange
</td>
<td>
In year 0809 exchange rate variance (+£4m). Exchange rate variance 09/10 to 13/14 (+£2m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>January 2009</td>
<td>-27</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
In year out turn against forecast – Risk mitigation action leading to minimal level of unforeseen activities emerging (-£10m), Ship Borne Rolling Vertical Landing (-£8m) due to overestimate of the work required at this stage of the programme, slippage in the integration of Joint Combat Aircraft with the Future Aircraft Carriers (-£6m) due to slower than anticipated progress, correction of in year System Development and Demonstration Contribution (+£2m). Re-profiling of future years comprising of Ship Borne Rolling and Vertical Landing – reassessment of the funding required to return the aircraft with a higher payload (-£1m), updated assessment of the expected implementation work supporting the Autonomic Logistics Information System – a global system for all maintenance and spares for Joint Strike Fighter (-£2m). An increase due to Joint Safe Escape – the ability to deploy weapons safely (+£1m) which was not previously explicitly forecast, refinement of Risk mitigation funding for future years (£4m), Reduction of Safety Case – a requirement to ensure the aircraft is fit to fly (-£2m) due to the cost to the UK being reduced by the contribution of partner nations. Cost of Capital Charge
-variance as a result of above (+£3m).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+12</td>
<td>Accounting Adjustments and Re-definitions</td>
<td>
MPR07: The Integrated Project Team conducted a review of the project work schedule which has given the team sufficient certainty to include more accurate accruals for the duration of the project (-£10m). Accounting Adjustment made in MPR06 now reflected in re-profiling of programme (-£2m). Interest on capital correction (MPR02
+£46m; MPR03 -£12m). New Defence Procurement Agency requirement to include Price Forecasting Group costs within the equipment plan (+£1m). Additional interest on
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>capital from new Defence Procurement Agency IT accrual methodology (+£1m). Accounting reclassification of feasibility studies (-£2m). Difference in variation figures due to revision of Cost of Capital Charge (-£16m). MPR06: Change of accounting treatment for System Development and Demonstration contributions. (+£19m). Re-profile of 2005/06 accrual into later years. (-£18m). Removal of 2005/06 accrual, reconciliation of accrual (+£1m). MPR05: Re profiling of UK specific tasks (+£3m). Adjustment of treatment of Cost of Capital Charges calculation (+£1m).</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>+280</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>MPR08: In year out turn against forecast –
including minor changes for 2007/08 (-£14m). UK non System Development and Demonstration National work;
Changes to reflect realism: UK Precision Guided Bomb (-£7m), Carrier Variant Future integration (+£1m) and Operational Test and Evaluation (-£7m). Maturation of risk identified since Equipment Plan 07: Autonomic Logistic Information System (+£5m), Conformity European markings (+£6m), Reassessment of risk (+£6m). Reassessment of Main programme expenditure: Mission Support (+£2m), Reprogramming (+£10m), Bowman (+£4m). Planning Round 08 Option not included in Equipment Plan 07 (-£7m). Cost of Capital charge as a result of above realignment (-£5m). MPR07: Re-assessment of UK National Work -
attributable cost which include: UK integration costs: (-£94m), Block 3 weapons adjusted to reflect the latest costing from Prime contractor (+£7m), Safety Case now defined to prepare for contract placement in 2007/08 (+£11m) and re-assessment of risk provision (-£87m). Break out from reassessment from risk provision above which are: UK basing integration &amp; testing (+£5m), Identification of Operational Test
&amp; Evaluation costs (+£26m). Outturn for 2006/07 versus Forecast (-£6m). Increase in Cost of Capital Charge resulting from change of planning assumption on delivery of Intangible assets (+£48m). Adjustment for realism in the cost of the UK non-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

System Development and

Demonstration work resulting from a deeper review of the estimates originally provided by the US (+£43m). Fewer UK studies than originally planned (MPR02 -£1m; MPR03 (-£6m).

MPR06: Reviews of the external missile systems for Joint Combat Aircraft resulted in the removal of the requirement for integrating externally mounted Brimstone

(-£41m) and Advanced Short Range

Air to Air Missile (-£49m), and Paveway II and III (-£1m) capabilities. Further UK participation in the Joint Integrated Test Force to reflect UK acceptance into service strategy (+£20m).

MPR05: Provision for Alternate

Changed

Helmet Mounted Display System

Historic -499 Capability

removed (-£40m). Reassessment of

Requirement

2004/05 forecast expenditure (-£12m). Review of miscellaneous requirement including Exchange of Letters Risk Provision (-£40m), design of UK Specific Support (£3m), Environmental Protection (-

£3m) and Autonomic Logistic

Information System interoperability (£6m). Block IV weapons as a result of Joint Strike Fighter programme realignment (-£368m) and associated increase Cost of Capital charge (+£44m).

MPR08: System Development and

Demonstration contribution against MPR07 Versus MPR08 Exchange

rate: 07/08 (-£12m), 08/09 to 13/14

Historic -106 Exchange Rates (-£6m). MPR07: Exchange rate

against profile until 2013 (-£11m). Change in dollar/pound exchange rate (MPR06 +£9m; MPR05

-£181m; MPR04 -£85m; MPR03 £9m; MPR02 +£189m). MPR07:
Re-alignment of programme now included in Development - Ship-borne Rolling and Vertical Landing (+£55m).

Historic +113 Technical Factors MPR05: Reduction of Risk line as a

result of programme delays (-£29m). MPR 04: Re-examination of risk within the overall programme.

(+£87m).

Difference between the risk allowed for in the most likely (50%) and the

Historic -202 Risk Differential approved figures at Main Gate (-

£213m). Variation due to revised approval figures (+£11m).

Net Variation -423

### B.3.1.2. Production Sustainment and Follow on Development

Date

Variation (£m)

Factor

Reason for Variation

\-

\-

\-

\-

Net Variation

0

### B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase

| Description |     |
|-----------------|-----|
|                 |     |

## B.4. Unit production cost[^1] - not applicable

## B.5. Progress against approved Support/PFI Cost - not applicable

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual Date of Main Gate

Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of

Assessment Phase

(months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>January 2001</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for introduction of the Capability
– not applicable

## C.3. In Service Date

### C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th colspan="4">In Service Date</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td colspan="4">Six embarked aircraft at Readiness 2 (two-five days notice to move) – to align with the US acquisition framework and definitions.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">C.3.2. Progress against approved Dates</td>
<td colspan="3"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td>
Approved Date
</td>
<td>Actual / Forecast Date</td>
<td>Variation (months)</td>
<td>
In-Year

Variation (months)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.3.3. Timescale variation - not applicable

### C.3.4. Other costs resulting from Timescale variation - not applicable

### C.3.5. Operational Impact of In Service Date variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 49%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Description
</th>
<th colspan="2"></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Joint Combat Aircraft
</td>
<td colspan="2">
The tailored Demonstration Main Gate noted but did not approve ISD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">C.4. Initial Operating Capability

### C.4.1. Definition
</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Description
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Initial Operating Capability</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Joint Combat Aircraft
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Yet to be defined
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.4.2. Progress against approved Dates - not applicable

### C.4.3. Timescale variation - not applicable

### C.4.4. Other costs resulting from Timescale variation - not applicable

### C.4.5. Operational Impact of Initial Operating Capability variation - not applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability

### C.5.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Full Operating Capability
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Combat Aircraft</td>
<td>
Yet to be defined
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### C.5.2. Progress Report - not applicable

## C.6. Support Contract – not applicable

Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels

### D.1.1. Project

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 26%" />
<col style="width: 54%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Readiness Levels</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">
Readiness Area
</td>
<td>At Main Gate</td>
<td rowspan="2">Comments</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Level</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Technology</td>
<td>6/7</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>System</td>
<td>5/6</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.2. Performance against Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
Line of Development
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th></th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
To be met
</th>
<th>At Risk</th>
<th>Not to be met</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
1. Equipment
</td>
<td>
36 Force Elements at Readiness.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2. Training
</td>
<td>
Sufficient trained and available personnel.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
3. Logistics
</td>
<td>
Successful integration of Joint Strike Fighter support solution into UK and Joint Supply Chain.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
4. Infrastructure
</td>
<td>
Completion of Main Operating Base Lossiemouth.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
5. Personnel
</td>
<td>
Sufficient suitable personnel available for training and support.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
6. Doctrine
</td>
<td>
Doctrine in place.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
7. Organisation
</td>
<td>
Suitable command structures in place to support United States based Initial Operational Test and Evaluation and Operational Conversion Unit, as well as UK Main Operating Base, Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers and Forward Operating Base operations.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
8. Information
</td>
<td>
Integration of Joint Combat Aircraft into UK Global Information Infrastructure.
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
Yes
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Percentage of those measured currently forecast to be met</td>
<td>
100%
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">In-Year Change</td>
<td>
0
</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.2.1.1. Defence Lines of Development Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 24%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Date</th>
<th>Line of Development</th>
<th>Factor</th>
<th>Reason for Variation</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>March 09</td>
<td>
Logistics
</td>
<td>
Budgetary Factors
</td>
<td>
Insufficient Maritime Intra-Theatre Lift to support Joint Combat Aircraft aboard Queen Elizabeth Class Carriers
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>March 09</td>
<td>
Information
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
UK Ground Information Infrastructure may be unable to support the requirements of Joint Combat Aircraft Information Systems
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures

### D.3.1. Joint Combat Aircraft

### D.3.1.1. Performance against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">
KPM
</th>
<th rowspan="2">
LOD
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th></th>
<th>Forecast</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>To be met</th>
<th>At Risk</th>
<th>
Not to be met
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
01
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Survivability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
02
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Interoperability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
03
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Combat Radius
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
04
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Mission Performance
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
05
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Mission reliability
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
06
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Logistic footprint
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
07
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Sortie Generation
</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
Percentage currently forecast to be met
</td>
<td></td>
<td>100%</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
In-Year Change
</td>
<td></td>
<td>0</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.3.1.2. Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
<col style="width: 35%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Date
</th>
<th></th>
<th>
Key Measure
</th>
<th>
Factor
</th>
<th>
Reason for Variation
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
KPM 04
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
The Short Take Off element of KPM 04 (based on Invincible Class Carriers not Future Aircraft Carrier) will be changed in the ongoing KPM review, although current projections indicate robust Short Take Off performance from Future Aircraft Carrier. Weight challenges and propulsion system integration issues place the Vertical Landing Bring Back element of KPM 04 at increased risk; the Integrated Project Team has commenced programme action to amend the System Development and Demonstration contract to satisfy a requirement to undertake Shipborne Rolling Vertical Landing.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Historic</td>
<td>
KPM 06
</td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</td>
<td>
Subject to intensive programme action by Prime Contractor. Funded design options that significantly reduce risk have been identified and further changes will be considered in due course.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### D.3.1.3. Operational Impact of variation

KPM

Date

Status

Operational impact of variation

04

At Risk

March 2009

Severely limits the operational

effectiveness of the platform and

results in high waste of weapons

06

At Risk

March 2009

Limits the use of Joint Combat

Aircraft within medium scale

operations

Total

### D.3.2. Support Contract – not applicable

[^1]: In order to match the US procurement cycle the JCA Main Gate was tailored for Development only. Unit Production Cost approval will be sought as part of MG UK production approval.

[^2]: The In Service date (ISD) approval will be sought as part of the incremental Production Approval strategy.
