---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Post-Main Gate
Project: SUPPORT VEHICLE
Page_from: 133.0
Page_to: 142.0
Project_label: SUPPORT VEHICLE
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_133_142.md
---
POST MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

SUPPORT VEHICLE

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

GENERAL SUPPORT VEHICLES

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Expeditionary Logistics & Support)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Battlespace Manoeuvre)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the PROJECT

## 1a. Project Description, Progress and Key Future Events

The Support Vehicle Programme will Procure the Future Tri-Service Cargo and Recovery Vehicles that will Increase the Military Materiel Lift/Distribution and Recovery Capabilities. the Programme will Procure a Fleet of Vehicles Consisting of 42 Variants but Effectively Based Around the Light, Medium and Heavy Cargo Vehicles (6, 9 and 15 Tonne Respectively), the 7,000 Litre Unit Support Tanker, the Recovery Vehicle and the Recovery Trailer. These Vehicles will Replace the in-Service 4, 8 and 14 Tonne Cargo Vehicles and the Three in-Service Recovery Vehicle Types.

The Contract to Procure 5,165 Vehicles Was Signed on 31 March 2005 and this Original Contract Was Extended by a Further 2,077 Vehicles in July 2006. These Extra Vehicles Were Ordered Following a Comprehensive Investment Appraisal (and Review Note Approval) which Demonstrated it to be Considerably Cheaper to Buy New Vehicles Rather than Run on the Best of the in-Service Fleet. the First 6, 9 and 15 Tonne Prototype (Quantity 14) Vehicles Were Produced and Have Undergone Formal Military Trials which Commenced, on Schedule, on 30 October 2006.

The Total Support Vehicle Programme Provides 6,928 Cargo Vehicles, 288 Recovery Vehicles and 69 Recovery Trailers, Replacing a Fleet of Just under 15,000 in-Service Vehicles.

The in-Service Date (ISD) is in 2 Stages – the ISD for 161 Cargo Vehicles Was Achieved, One Month Early, in June 2007 and the ISD for 8 Recovery Vehicles Plus 2 Recovery Trailers Has Been Declared at February 2008.

## 1b. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="2">critical to Achievement of ISD</Th>
<th Colspan="2">
Critical to Initial Gate Requirement
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
<td>project Title</Td>
<td>
Forecast ISD
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 1c. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>contractor(s)</Th>
<th>
Contract Scope
</Th>
<th>contract Type</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
MAN Truck &amp; Bus UK

Ltd (Previously Known as MAN ERF UK Ltd)</Td>
<td>demonstration to InService</Td>
<td>firm Price for the First Five Years, then Fixed Price Subject to Variation of Price</Td>
<td>international Competition</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 2: PROJECT COSTS

## 2a. Performance Against Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Procurement Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
1272
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
1641
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-369
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
+9
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2b. Reasons for Variation from Approved Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>december 2007</Td>
<td>+9</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>funding for Seating Kits Returned to Programme.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-55</Td>
<td>accounting Adjustments and Re-Definitions</Td>
<td>the Cost of Warranty, Previously Included in Demonstration and Manufacture Costs, Has Been Transferred to in-Service Costs (-£64m). Derivation of Approved Cost on a Resource Basis (-£4m). Difference in Variation Figures Due to Revision of Cost of Capital Charge from 6 to 3.5% (+£13m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-79</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>removal of the Procurement of New Seating Kits from the Programme (-£10m). Removal of Bowman Installation Kits from the Programme in 2002/03 (-£33m). Change of Vehicle Mix (+£20m). Option Taken in 2002/03 to Slip ISD &amp; Compress Delivery (+£40m). Reduced Milestone Payments (-£104m). Reduced Consultancy Costs (-£1m). Option Taken to Reduce Recovery Vehicles by Quantity 75 (-£48m) and Changed Deliveries Profile (-£5m). Better Estimates of Industry Costs (+£52m). Change in Cost of Capital Charge Due to Revised Accruals Profile (+£10m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+36</Td>
<td>changed Requirement</Td>
<td>a Saving of £19m Achieved Through Negotiation when Reducing the Number of Recovery Vehicles, Previously Forecast at £18m (-£1m). Addition of BOWMAN Installation Kits (+£70m). Additional Seating Kits (+£10m). Future Revenue Spend Increased to Bring Project Support Requirements into Line with The</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>factor</Td>
<td>explanation</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td>revised Programme (+£3m). Reduction in Support Vehicles (Cargo) Requirement from the Main Gate Approved Quantity of 8,231 to 6,928 Support Vehicles (Cargo), Together with a Reduction In, and Reprofiling Of, Future Capital Spend (-£28m). Department Review Resulting in Reduction of Recovery Vehicles and Seating Kits (-£18m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>department Trials Have Been Integrated with the Contractor’s Trials Resulting in Progressive Acceptance, Reduced Trials Costs and Reducing the Amount of Technical Risk Funding in Future Years of the Project.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-274</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>difference Between the Risk Allowed in the Most Likely (50%) and Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimate at Main Gate (-£275m). Variation Due to Revised Approval Figures (+£1m).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>-369</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Expenditure to 31 March 2008 (£m)
</Th>
<th>
233
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>2d. Years of Peak Procurement Expenditure</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
2009/2010
</Td>
<td>
2010/2011
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2e. Unit Production Cost

| Unit Production Cost (£m) |             | Quantities Required |                      |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| at Main Gate              | Current | at Main Gate        | Current          |
| \\\                        | \\\      | 8,231 Cargo             | 6,928 Cargo          |
| \\\                        | \\\      | 389 Recovery            | 288 Recovery         |
| \\\                        | \\\      | 69 Recovery Trailers    | 69 Recovery Trailers |

# SECTION 3: PROJECT TIMESCALE

## 3a. Definition of in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 78%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
ISD Definition:
</Th>
<th>achievement of an Operational Capability with 161 Cargo Vehicles, 8 Recovery Vehicles and 2 Recovery Trailers with the Appropriate Supporting Through Life Package.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3b. Performance Against Approved in-Service Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Date
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>current Forecast ISD</Td>
<td>
February 2008
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
April 2006
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation (Months)</Td>
<td>
+22
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>in-Year Changes</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3c. Reasons for Variation from Approved ISD

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (Months)
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+2</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>
Increased Time Given to all Bidders to Finalise their Technical Solution (+1 Month). Time Added to Review the Technical Solutions and the Need to Revise the Support Strategy (+1 Month).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+17</Td>
<td>
Contracting Process
</Td>
<td>
Unanticipated Second Round of Tendering Required to Address Commercial Risks, Costs, Performance &amp; Time Efficiencies (+2 Months). Additional Time Required by Bidders to Prepare, and the MoD to Evaluate, the Second Round Bids (+5 Months). Time Necessary to Prepare and Evaluate Unanticipated Third Round of Bidding and Change to Fielding Plan / ISD (+5 Months). Time Necessary for Approvals and Contractual Negotiations (+5 Months).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+10</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>
Planning Measure to Reduce Support Vehicles Recovery Vehicle Quantities from 389 to 314 and Delay First Deliveries until February 2008.
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-7</Td>
<td>risk Differential</Td>
<td>
Change in Risk (Time) Allowed Between the Most Likely (50%) and the Highest Acceptable (90%) Estimates at Main Gate (-7 Months).
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation</Td>
<td>+22</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3d. Cost Resulting from ISD Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>type of Cost/Saving</Th>
<th>
Cost £m
</Th>
<th>
Saving £m
</Th>
<th>
Explanation
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Support Costs of the Current Equipment
</Td>
<td>
29
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>the Cost of Running on the Current Fleet.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Total
</Td>
<td>
+29
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 3e. Operational Impact of ISD Variation

The Delayed ISD Has Resulted in the Life of the Current Equipment Being Extended, Leading to Additional Support Costs and a Delay in Fielding an Increased Operational Capability.

# SECTION 4: KEY USER REQUIREMENTS

## 4a. Performance Against Approved Key User Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 10%" />
<col Style="Width: 9%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
KUR Serial
</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>forecast to be

Met
</Th>
<th>
At Risk
</Th>
<th>
Not to be Met
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Support Vehicle (Cargo &amp; Recovery)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 01
</Td>
<td>
The Support Vehicle Recovery and Support Vehicle Cargo Shall be Capable of Meeting the Defence Planning Assumptions
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 02
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Operating in World-Wide Climatic Conditions
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 03
</Td>
<td>
Compatible with Existing and Planned Replenishment Systems
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 04
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Completing a 48 Hour Battlefield Mission without Replenishment
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 05
</Td>
<td>
Able to Communicate with Other Units in their Formation
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 06
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Strategic Deployment Including by Sea
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Support Vehicles (Cargo Only)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 07
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Completing Required Battlefield Mission
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 08
</Td>
<td>
Deployable in Its Operation State by Air
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 09
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Operating Within the Same Parameters as Other Vehicles Classified as Medium Mobility
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">
Support Vehicle (Recovery Only)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 10
</Td>
<td>
The Land, Littoral and Air Components Shall Have the Capability to Recover Bogged, Damaged and Broken Down Wheeled and Light a Vehicles and Provide the Lift Capability to the Repair Process in Order to Return Them to Operational Use.
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 11
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Recovering Military Vehicles in an Operational Environment (Including Tactical Operations Throughout Day &amp; Night).
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 12
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Lifting Engines and Main Assemblies as Part of the Operational Repair Process
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 13
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Manoeuvring Engines and Main Assemblies as Part of the Operational Repair Process
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 14
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Moving Solo over the Same Terrain, Within the Same Timeframe, as the B Vehicles it Supports
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 15
</Td>
<td>
Capable of Recovering Casualty Vehicles from Point of Failure to a Place of Repair
</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
Percentage Currently Forecast to be Met<a Href="Fn1"
Class="Footnote-Ref" Id="Fnref1" Role="Doc-Noteref"><sup>1</Sup></A>
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
88%
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">
In-Year Change
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>
<section Id="Footnotes" Class="Footnotes Footnotes-End-of-Document"
Role="Doc-Endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li Id="Fn1">23 of the Full List of 26 KURs are to be Met. the MPR Contains an Abbreviated List for Simplicity.<a Href="Fnref1"
Class="Footnote-Back" Role="Doc-Backlink">↩︎</A></Li>
</Ol>
</Section>

## 4b. Reasons for Variation Against Approved Key Requirements

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 21%" />
<col Style="Width: 35%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Key Requirement
</Th>
<th>factor</Th>
<th>explanation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 01</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>relaxed Requirement as a Result of Capability/Cost Trade Off.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur 02</Td>
<td>
Changed Budgetary

Priorities</Td>
<td>relaxed Requirement as a Result of Capability/Cost Trade Off.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# SECTION 5: HISTORY UP to MAIN GATE APPROVAL

## 5a. Description of the Assessment Phase

There Was No Assessment Phase. the Support Vehicles Programme Had Its Origin as the Future Cargo Vehicles and the Future Wheeled Recovery Vehicle Projects. These Were Launched as Potential Private Finance Initiative Programmes with Advertisements in August 1998 and September 1999 Respectively. the Future Cargo Vehicles Project Progressed Through PreQualification and Outline Proposal Stages with Five Bidders Short-Listed. an Initial Gate Business Case Was Drafted in December 1999, but Was not Submitted for Approval Because it Did not Demonstrate Value for Money.

Further Work Was Requested to Identify Areas for Further Innovation, and also to Develop a ‘smart’ Public Sector Comparator. Work Continued to Produce a more Robust Case but it Became Clear that Confidence in Private Finance Initiative Procurement Was Unlikely to Improve. the Decision Was Taken in March 2001 to Replace the Private Finance Initiative Procurement Strategy with a Conventional Strategy and Hold a Fresh Competition. Furthermore the Future Cargo Vehicles and Future Wheeled Recovery Vehicle Programmes Were Merged into a Single Procurement and Proceeded Directly to the Main Investment Decision which Was Secured in November 2001. the Project Bypassed the Assessment Phase Because it Was Concluded that the Technologies Were Mature and as the Department Had, During the Private Finance Initiative Phase of the Project, Acquired a Detailed Knowledge of the Commercial Vehicle Sector, the Risks Were Low. It Was also Necessary to Avoid Further Delays in Order to Maintain Industrial Interest in the Requirement. the Time and Cost Boundaries Were Set at Main Gate and Following an Advertisement Placed in the MoD Contracts Bulletin, a Short-List of Six Prime Contractors Was Drawn Up.

## 5b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

| £m (Outturn Prices)       | Assessment Phase Cost | Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement Expenditure |
|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Actual Cost                   | \-                        | \-                                                        |
| Approved Cost at Initial Gate | \-                        | \-                                                        |
| Variation                     | \-                        |                                                           |

## 5c. Duration of Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
</Colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>date of Main Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
November 2001
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>date of Initial Gate Approval</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>length of Assessment Phase [months]</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5d. Cost Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>£m (Outturn Prices)</Th>
<th>lowest</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>highest</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cost of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Forecast at Main Gate</Td>
<td>1180</Td>
<td>1367</Td>
<td>1641</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>expected Envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 5e. ISD Boundaries at Initial Gate and Main Gate Approvals

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>earliest</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>latest Acceptable</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast ISD at Main Gate</Td>
<td>
November 2004
</Td>
<td>
September 2005
</Td>
<td>april 2006</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability Was Expected to be Available at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

THIS PAGE is INTENTIONALLY BLANK
