---
year: 2008.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: FUTURE AIRCRAFT CARRIER
page_from: 193.0
page_to: 196.0
project_label: Queen Elizabeth Class Aircraft Carriers
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2008_193_196.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

FUTURE AIRCRAFT

CARRIER

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

FUTURE AIRCRAFT CARRIER (CVF)

Single Point of Accountability for project capability: Director Equipment Capability (Above Water Effect)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Carrier Strike Senior Responsible Owner

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

The requirement for the Future Aircraft Carrier was endorsed in the Strategic Defence Review which identified a continuing need for rapidly deployable forces with the reach and selfsufficiency to act independently of host-nation support. The Strategic Defence Review concluded that the ability to deploy offensive air power would be central to future force projection operations, with carriers able to operate the largest possible range of aircraft in the widest possible range of roles. The current Invincible Class of carriers was designed for Cold War anti-submarine warfare operations. With helicopters and a limited air-defence capability provided by a relatively small number of embarked Sea Harriers, it was judged that this capability would no longer meet future United Kingdom requirements. It was therefore decided to replace the Invincible Class with two larger and more capable aircraft carriers. Future Aircraft Carrier’s offensive air power will be provided primarily by the Future Joint Combat Aircraft. The Carrier Aircraft Group will also operate the Maritime Airborne Surveillance and Control system together with helicopters from all three services in a variety of roles that include anti-submarine/antisurface warfare, attack and support.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e. Main gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Future Aircraft Carrier received Initial Gate approval in December 1998 and Invitations to Tender were issued in January 1999. Following tender evaluation, competitive firm price contracts for the Assessment Phase, each potentially worth some £30m, were awarded to BAE Systems and Thales UK in November 1999. Initially, the Assessment Phase was broken down into two stages. The first involved the examination of several carrier designs, and helped inform the decision in January 2001 to select the United States Joint Strike Fighter as the option with best potential to meet the Joint Combat Aircraft requirement. Stage 1 completed in June 2001, following which proposals from the contractors for Stage 2 were considered, together with an assessment of their views on the level of work needed to adequately de-risk the programme. After careful consideration, the conclusion was reached that the original two-stage approach no longer offered value for money and the Assessment Phase strategy was changed.

The competitive second stage was revised and shortened (completing in November 2002) and enabled the competing contractors to concentrate on refining their designs and taking key tradeoff decisions. An innovative Continuous Assessment process was used throughout to evaluate the contractors' performance which led to the conclusion that an alliance approach involving BAE Systems, Thales UK and the Department represented the best approach to Future Aircraft Carrier. The innovative Alliance procurement strategy will enable the full exploitation of the resources and strengths of the alliance participants with the shared objective of improving on agreed performance targets and was announced in January 2003. A third stage of assessment was therefore taken forward on this basis to further increase the maturity of the design and determine the alliancing strategy for Future Aircraft Carrier. Stage 3 completed in March 2004.

In July 2004, the Assessment Phase was extended into Stage 4 to further mature the design and carry out risk reduction work, to ensure that the best technical & procurement solution was achieved. Alliancing principles were agreed with BAE Systems and Thales UK and further developed with the selection in February 2005 of Kellogg, Brown & Root UK Ltd as an additional participant in the Alliance. The timescale for completing the design and risk reduction work was further extended in August 2005 (into Stage 5) although this did not result in any additional cost to the programme. The Assessment Phase completed end January 2006 at a revised total cost of £297m (following receipt of Cost Certificates from the alliance participants).

Following direction from the Investment Approvals Board, the project has adopted an incremental approach to Main Gate approval with the Demonstration and Manufacturing Phases being divided into two sequential Main Gate approval points. The first phase (Demonstration), which included expanding the alliance to include Babcock Engineering Services and VT Shipbuilding, was approved by the Investment Approvals Board and Treasury in December

2005\. The total cost of the Demonstration Phase (excluding Indirect Resource Departmental Expenditure Limit, but including non recoverable VAT) was approved at £297m (not to exceed) and £254m (at 50%
confidence). The Demonstration Phase should complete in mid 2008 with total expenditure to 31^st^ March of £252m. The second and final Main Gate approval, to proceed with the Manufacturing Phase of the project was announced by Secretary of State on 25^th^ July 2007 at a not to exceed cost of £3.9billion including the capitalised Assessment Phase costs and Demonstration Phase costs.

In March 2006, the UK agreed a Memorandum Of Understanding that provides for the supply to France of a common baseline design data pack to enable French industry to bid for the design, manufacture and support of one Future Aircraft Carrier (France). France has paid an initial entry fee and contributed to the costs of the UK Demonstration Phase.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
297
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
118
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
+179
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Earliest</th>
<th>Latest</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">The Future Aircraft Carrier is a key enabling component of carrier strike, capable of delivering the full level of offensive air effort, at medium scale, from the sea. The two Future Aircraft Carriers will replace the current in-service Aircraft Carriers, HMSs Ark Royal and Illustrious, which have planned Out of Service Dates of 2012 and 2015 respectively. The decision to divide Demonstration and Manufacture into 2 sequential main approvals was taken to ensure that there is greater certainty on overall time and cost prior to committing to manufacture and to allow for coherency with the Defence Industrial Strategy. The Investment Approvals Board and Treasury approved the demonstration phase of the project in December 2005. Main Gate approval for manufacturing was announced by Secretary of State on 25<sup>th</sup>
July 2007.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 24%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
