---
Year: 2013.0
Project_type: Post-Main-Gate Projects
Project: Complex Weapons Pipeline
Page_from: 68.0
Page_to: 89.0
Project_label: Complex Weapons Pipeline
Project_type_label: D&M Phase
Filenm: Naomprss_2013_68_89.md
---
TRUE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 55%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Complex Weapons Pipeline
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Complex Weapons
</Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Dr Dai Morris FMC-WECA-Head
</Td>
<td>09 May 13</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Fireshadow Brimstone 2 Sea Ceptor Demonstration SPEAR Capability 2 Spiral Development SPEAR Capability 3 Future Local Area Air Defence System (Land) Future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) Future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Light)
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision Post-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision Pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Team Complex Weapons Initiative is Based on Meeting the UK's Enduring Requirement to Have Battle Winning Military Capability Through the Use of Complex Weapons; to be Assured that the Weapons will Perform as Expected; and to Retain the Ability to Develop Leading Edge Complex Weapons Technologies.

Within this Context, the Initiative Aims to Deliver:

1.  Improved, Adaptable and Flexible Complex Weapons that can be Shaped to Meet Current and Future Military Capability Needs;

2.  Freedom of Action and Operational Advantage in Our Complex Weapons Through a Sustained Indigenous Industrial Construct.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

In April 2008 an Initial Gate Submission Was Made to the Investment Approvals Board for the Complex Weapons Sector. This Was Approved in June 2008. the Business Case Sought Approval to Enter a Non-Competitive Assessment Phase with Team Complex Weapons. the Assesssment Phase Was Designed to Test the Viability of UK Sovereign Acquisition of Complex Weapons Through a Modular and Funding Pipeline Approach that Offered Greater Value for Money. This Was Consistent with the Defence Industrial Strategy in Maintaining Operational Sovereignty of UK Complex Weapons and Sustaining UK Industry's Specialist Capabilities.

Initial Work Considered a Number of Options, Ranging from Non-Competitive Based Around Team Complex Weapons to Full Open Competition. the Options Were Assessed on their Ability to Meet Military Capability, Operational Sovereignty and Value for Money Measured Against the Draft Concept of Analysis. the Analysis Strongly Indicated that the Continued Use of Competition Would Progressively Erode the MOD's Ability to Secure Affordable and Effective Military Capability and Restrict Future Choice and Decision Making.

## A.3. Project History

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>the Team Complex Weapons Proposition is Founded on the Defence Industrial Strategy that Set Out the UK's Intent to Preserve Operational Sovereignty of Its Complex Weapons. the First Step in Assessing the Viability of a UK Sovereign Acquistion Was a Non Competitive Assessment Phase which Was Approved by the Investment Approvals Board (Initial Gate June 2008). This Covered Risk Reduction Work to Develop Solutions to Meet the Future Anti-Surface Guided Weapon, Loitering Munition;
Stormshadow Capability Enhancement Programme (SSCEP); Future Local Area Air Defence System; and Selected Precision Effects at Range (SPEAR) Programmes. Review Note 1 (March 2009) Sought Approval of a Second Tranche of Money to Continue the Assessment Phase and Review Note 2 (November 2009) Sought Approval for Funds to Conclude the Assessment Phase and to Address the Questions Raised by the Investment Approvals Board (July/October 2009). the Assessment Phase Concluded that the Preferred Option Was a Long Term Partnering Model Based on Bilateral Arrangements with the Team Complex Weapons Prime Contractors. with the Strategic Defence Review on the Horizon Interim Main Gate 1 (March 2010) Proposed Entering into a Shorter Term Interim Portfolio Management Agreement (PMA-I) with MBDA UK. It also Sought Approval for Expenditure to Meet Only Immediate Complex Weapons Requirements Specifically:
Loitering Munition (Fire Shadow) (Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture);
SPEAR Capability 2 Block 1 (Demonstration &amp; Manufacture) (Now Brimstone 2);
Future Local Area Air Defence System (Assessment Phase);
SPEAR Capability 2 Block 2 (Now Spiral Development) (Assessment Phase); and SPEAR Capability 3 (Assessment Phase)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>interim Main Gate 2 Was the Second of Three Submissions which Sought Approval for the Demonstration Phase of the Maritime Element of the Future Local Area Air Defence System (Maritime). This Was Approved in Principle by the Investment Approvals Committee in April 2011 and in December 2011 Director General Finance Confirmed that it Was Affordable. in the Period Since Interim Main Gate 1 and Interim Main Gate 2 Were Approved a Number of the Capabilities Have Been Given Formal Names, Viz:
Future Local Area Air Defence System Demonstration - Sea Ceptor D Loitering Munition - Fire Shadow SPEAR Capability 2 Block 1 - Brimstone 2 the Formal Names Rather than the Intial Descriptors Used in Interim Main Gate 1/2 will be Used in the Remainder of the Project Summary Sheet. 2011/12 Interim Main Gate 1 Fire Shadow Demonstration and Manufacture of the Initial Increment of Fire Shadow (Block 1b) Was Approved under Interim Main Gate 1. Contract Deliveries Were Made and Accepted, as Planned in March 2012, Effectively Concluding the Delivery of the Initial Increment. Brimstone 2 (i) Rocket Motor April 2011 - An Issue Identified. June - High Level Issues Resolved. February 2012 Rocket Motor Failed Qualification. Detailed Investigations into Failure Begins (Ii) Tandem Firing Performance Trials Undertaken July/August 2011; Outcome Unsatisfactory. Discussions with Company Ongoing (Iii) Warhead Gained Critical Design Review in December 2011 (Iv) Telemetry Firings in January/February 2012 (using Legacy Rocket Motor). SPEAR Capability 2 Block 2 Planning Round 2011 Option to Delete and Decision to Continue with SPEAR Capability 2 Spiral Development. SPEAR Capability 3 (i) Request for Quotations (RFQ) for Seekers Released - February 2011 (Ii) Initial Discussions About Demonstration and Manufacture/Integration Issues with Typhoon - May 2011 (Iii) Assessment Phase Subsystem Downselect, Concept Design Review and Phase 2 Gate Review Completed -
July 2011 (Iv) MBDA Commenced Launcher Study Because BRU-61 Launcher Found to be Incompatible with Chilled Airframe Design - August 2011 (v) Warhead Supplier Recommendation Endorsed by Portfolio Management Board; Systems Design Review Complete; BAE Systems under Contract for Phase 1 of Airframe and Propulsion Flight Demonstration. Draft System Requirement Document Issued - December 2011 (Vi) Contract Let with Hamilton Sunstrand for Turbojet Technical Assistance Agreement - January 2012. Interim Main Gate 2 Following Investment Approvals Board Approval in April 2011, Future Local Area Air Defence System (Maritime) (Now Officially Known as Sea Ceptor) Type 23 Demonstration Phase Contract Was Placed in December 2011. MBDA is the Prime Contractor with Supporting Non-Prime Elements Provided by BAE Maritime Services, QinetiQ and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl). Preliminary Design Review Successfully Concluded in February/March 2012.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

Interim Main Gate 3

This Was the Third of the Submissions and Concerned Approval for the Future Anti-Surface Guided

Weapon (Heavy) Demonstration and Manufacture Phase. the Business Case Was Presented to

Equipment Capability Secretariat on 9 January 2012 and Was Considered by the Investment Approvals Committee on 18 January. on 31 January Director General Finance Approved the Case, with a Caveat that Negotiations Should be Concluded with France Before 31 March 2012. Bi-Laterals Continued, but by 28 March when Chief Secretary to the Treasury Wrote to the MOD, Discussions Had not Been Concluded and as Such Chief Secretary to the Treasury Approved the Case, Subject to Receiving French National Approval. Reflecting this Caveated Approvals Position and the Absence of a Final Negotiated Position on the Future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy) Demonstration and Manufacture Phase, Standard Major Projects Report Practice Has Been Followed Meaning that this

## A.4. in-Year Progress

Brimstone 2

Significant Technical Issues (E.g. Propellant Cracking and Liner De-Bonding) on the Vulcan Rocket Motor, Manufactured by Roxel, Were Discovered in January 2012. Following Considerable Red Team Expert Activity Since March 2012 There is Now Increased Confidence in this Roxel Solution Passing the Testing Environment and Achieving in Service Date by November 2015. This is Significantly Later than that Originally Planned (October 2012), but the Red Team Continues to Work with Roxel to Deliver the Capability, Although Fallback Options Remain under Consideration. to Monitor Roxel's Progress a Series of Risk Gate Reviews Have Been Established with the Final One, Risk Gate (4), Planned for June 2013 which is a Prerequisite Before Seeking Investment Approvals Committee Approval for the Programme Later this Year.

In Order to Mitigate the Risk on Operation HERRICK and Potential Contingent Operations, Resulting from the Delay to the Programme, the Defence Board Has Approved a Decision Point 2 Option for a Further Buy of Dual Mode Seeker (Non Insensitive Munition) Brimstone Missiles. This Additional Buy is Jointly Funded by MOD and MBDA and will be Delivered Later this Year.

Sea Ceptor Demonstration

Seeker Critical Design Review Was Held on 22 August 2012 with the Defence Science and

Technology Laboratory which Demonstrated Seeker Readiness for Air Carriage Trials. a Guided Firing Readiness Review (Significant Milestone) Was Conducted on 27 June 2012 and the Deliverable Was Accepted by the Project Team by 30 September 2012. Critical Design Review Commenced on 19 March 13 with Performance Aspects to be Completed in September 2013. Two Instrumented Firings Trials Successfully Conducted at Vidsel in April 2013.

The Latest MBDA Schedule Risk Analysis Conducted in February 2013 Concluded that the 50% Date for T23 Full Operating Capability in Service Date in 2016 Was Within 3 Weeks of the Approved Baseline. the Project Team is Now Conducting Risk Mitigation and Further Analysis in Order to Close this Variance. MBDA’s Project Schedule Has Been Refined from 2000 to 8000 Lines of Detail Since April 2011, as Part of Routine Demonstration Phase Business, Bringing Significantly Greater Granularity to Task Elements. Greater Confidence can be Derived.

Plan Actual % Status

Milestones 6 5 83 on Track

Deliverables 40 50 125 Ahead of Traget

Government Furnished Equipment 35 35 100 on Track

Fire Shadow

Fire Shadow Was Initially Expected to Deploy on Op HERRICK in April 2012, but Due to Changes in the Strategic Operation Task it Was Agreed that it Should not Deploy. in September 2011, the MOD Sponsor Directed that a User-Led Activity Should be Instigated, Dubbed the Fire Shadow Capability

Demonstration, to Inform Future Planning and Investment Decisions. the Fire Shadow Capability

Demonstration Was Outside of the Scope of the Original Interim Main Gate 1 and a Category D Capability Concept Demonstrator Business Case for the Fire Shadow Capability Demonstration Was Raised and Approved in February 2012. Trials Were Completed in June 2012 and the Final User Report Issued in November 12.

Driven Largely by Experience in Contemporary Operations, the Overall Indirect Fire Precision Attack Requirement (of which Fire Shadow is a Part) Was Revised in 2012. as a Result, Before Embarking on Further Demonstration and Manufacture Activity, an Assessment Phase is Being Planned to Assess the Optimum Means to Meet the New Requirement. It will Include the Assessment of the Extent to which Existing Systems and Technologies, Including Those from the Initial Increment of Fire Shadow, will be Exploited.

## A.5. Capability Risks

Interim Main Gate 1

Brimstone 2 - Replaces the Legacy Brimstone Missile's Energetics and Airframe with a New Insensitive Munitions (IM) Compliant Warhead, Rocket Motor and an Upgraded Seeker and Airframe. Brimstone 2 will Replace the Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone Capability Currently in Service with the Royal Air Force and will be Integrated Onto Tornado GR4 and is Intended for Integration on Typhoon. Spear Capability 3 is a New 100kg Class Weapon. This Capability will be the Primary Air-to-Ground Armament for the Joint Combat Aircraft (JCA)/F-35b Joint Strike Fighter from \\\, and Optimised for Internal Carriage. Spear Capability 3 will Provide the Means to Destroy/Defeat a Wide Range of Targets at Range, Including Mobile and Re-Locatable Targets, in all Weathers Day and Night, in Complex Environments under Tight Rules of Engagements. the Indirect Fire Precision Attack Programme will Address the Requirement to Attack Static and Moving Targets at Various Ranges. Within This, Fire Shadow will Focus on the Most Complex Targets where Man-in-the-Loop Capability is Required in Order to Ensure Mission Success and Minimise the Potential for Collateral Damage.

Interim Main Gate 2

The Sea Ceptor D Implementation will Provide Increased Capability over Sea Wolf that Addresses the Capability Shortfall Identified in the 2009 Capability Above Water Capability Audits.

The Sea Ceptor D Solution is the Only Candidate to Fill the Capability Gap that is both Affordable and will Meet the Key User Requirements (KURs) Within the Required Timescales.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>title of Associated Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>tornado GR4</Td>
<td>brimstone 2 - Missile in Service Date - To be Confirmed</Td>
<td>in Service</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>typhoon Future Capability Programme 2</Td>
<td>brimstone 2 - Typhoon Upgrade Programme – Missile in Service Date - To be Confirmed</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>lightning II</Td>
<td>spear Cap 3 - Expected Prior to Joint Combat Aircraft Present Assumed Service Entry</Td>
<td>post Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>apache Helicopter</Td>
<td>spear Cap 2 Block 2 - </Td>
<td>concept Phase</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="3">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">procurement Route</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 2 Spiral Development</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 3</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Local Air to Air Defence System (Land)</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Heavy)</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>future Anti Surface Guided Weapon (Light)</Td>
<td Colspan="3">non-Competitive - UK</Td>
<td>concept Phase</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="3">
Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>contractor</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>demonstration to Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

UK</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>mbda UK</Td>
<td>demonstration to Manufacture</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Non-Competitive -

UK</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 1%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Colspan="6">
Description
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Colspan="5">
The Current Support Approach is Through Individual Contracts for Each Weapon Type, E.g. Storm Shadow, Advanced Short Range Air to Air Missle, Etc. the Intent in Interim Main Gate 1 Was to Secure a Long Term Arrangement for in Service Support under the Unified Support Environment with MBDA. the Unified Support Environment Strategy Has Since Been Revised with the Transfer of the Explosives Business Stream of Joint Support Chain Services into Defence Equipment and Support (DE&amp;S) Weapons Operating Centre (WOC) and will be Taken Forward under the Wider Transformation Activity Required to Deliver Efficiencies into this Business. the Most Recent Contract with MBDA (April 2011) for the Sea Viper in Service Support Arrangement will Provide the Benefits Afforded by the Portfolio Management Agreement (Interim) Including Gainshare, and Has the Potential to Act as a Catalyst for in Service Support Transformation in the Longer Term.
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Title</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>
Contract Type
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">procurement Route</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>unified Support Environment</Td>
<td>
MBDA UK Ltd
</Td>
<td>manufacture to in Service</Td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
Non-Competitive -
UK
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>complex Weapons Assessment Phase</Td>
<td>239</Td>
<td>236</Td>
<td>-3</Td>
<td>30%</Td>
<td>30%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>spear Capability 3, SPEAR Capability 2 Block 2 and Sea Ceptor Assessment Phase Elements</Td>
<td>145</Td>
<td>139</Td>
<td>-6</Td>
<td>59%</Td>
<td>56%</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>384</Td>
<td>375</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
<td>49%</Td>
<td>48%</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/Increment Title</Td>
<td>
Approved (£m)
</Td>
<td>
Budgeted for (£m)
</Td>
<td>highest Approved (£m)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
-
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
246
</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
541
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>budgeted for Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- £m)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- £m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">246</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">247</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">+1</Td>
<td Rowspan="2">+4</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>541</Td>
<td>540</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>787</Td>
<td>787</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>+4</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.1. Cost Variation Against Approved Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

### B.3.1.1 Fire Shadow & Brimstone 2

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>
+3
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>in MPR 12 Team Complex Weapons Was Anticipating Spending Circa £3m in Financial Year 12/13 on Brimstone 2. Delays in the Project Meant this Money Was not Spent. the Money Should Have Been Rolled Forward in the Planning Round, but Was not and as Such the Previous Figure Was Understated by £3m.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
January 2013
</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>seeker Handover Trials Originally Planned for the UK Could not be Carried Out in Time and Had to be Conducted in the US with an Increase in Cost of £1m.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
-3
</Td>
<td>capability Trading</Td>
<td>fire Shadow and Brimstone 2 are both in the Demonstration &amp;
Manufacture Phase and Have a Combined Approval of £196m (£96m + £100m). Spend on These Two Projects Totals £243m Giving a Variance of +£47m. This Would Suggest that the Interim Main Gate 1 Approval Has Been Breached, However, in February 2009, Prior to the Complex Weapons Pipeline Approval, Team Complex Weapons Received Approval for Brimstone Insensitive Munition - £67m. the Project Spent £17m on Brimstone Insensitive Munition and Transferred the Remainder (£50m) to Brimstone 2, to Form Part of the Pipeline Funding. When this Additional Approval is Added to that in Interim Main Gate 1 (£196m) the Combined Approval is £246m. This Gives Overall Approvals Headroom of Circa £3m.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>
+1
</Td>
<td Colspan="2">
FALSE
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### B.3.1.2 Sea Ceptor Demonstration

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 32%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (£m)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>technical Factors</Td>
<td>of the £541m Approved under Interim Main Gate 2, £483m is Committed via a Firm Price Contract with MBDA. the Remaining £58m is for Non-Prime Activities, that is Contracts Let with Companies Other than MBDA. These Contracts will be Raised over the Remaining Period of the Project and will not Necessarily be Firm Price Agreements. as Such These Costs are Subject to Change and the Project’s Current Forecast is that There will be a Slight Underspend Against Approval of
£1m.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (£m)</Td>
<td>-1</Td>
<td>
FALSE
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3.2. Operational Impact of Cost Variations of Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to

31 March 2012 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>307</Td>
<td>36</Td>
<td>343</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>238</Td>
<td>160</Td>
<td>398</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>545</Td>
<td>196</Td>
<td>741</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</Th>
<th>actual Date of

Main Investment

Decision Approval</Th>
<th>length of Assessment Phase</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>complex Weapons</Td>
<td>june 2008</Td>
<td>april 2010</Td>
<td>22</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Approved
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td>
March 2012
</Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>
July 2012
</Td>
<td>
October 2012
</Td>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>
July 2016
</Td>
<td>
November 2016
</Td>
<td>
May 2018
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

## C.3.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>original Definition: The Project will Deliver 25 Safe and Useful Munitions in March 2012 (50%). These will Form a Start-Up Capability for Current Operations. MPR 2012 Definition: These Definitions are not Applicable yet Given the Incremental Acquisition Approach. in Service Date and Initial Operating Capability Would Likely Occur in Later Increments and be Subject to Definition and Approvals at an Appropriate Time. However, an Initial Batch of Weapons Systems Was Delivered, on Time, in March 2012. These Were Demonstrated in June 2012 and While the Success Rate Was Lower than Desired, Performace of the Hardware Met the Fire Shadow Key Performance Measures. Reason for Change: The Senior Responsible Owner Took a Decision not to Deploy the Weapon for Testing in Afghanistan as the Capability Was not Sufficiently Mature. It Could Therefore not Meet Its in-Service Date for Use in Afghanistan so it Has Been Re-Defined.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>200 Missiles and Six Aircraft Modified to Operate Them</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>in Service Date is the Date on which There is Sufficient Evidence Across all Defence Lines of Development (DLODS) to Allow the Front Line Command to Take Control of the System. More Specifically, in Service Date is Achieved with Successful Completion of Acceptance Activities which Includes Completion of the First Type 23 Platform Integration and Trials, Including Firings. for Sea Ceptor D Initial Operating Capability will Coincide with the in Service Date.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.2. Progress Against Approved Dates

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Approved Date
</Th>
<th>actual / Forecast Date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>in-Year Variation (+/- Months)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>march 2012</Td>
<td>in-Service Date Was not Met</Td>
<td>-</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>october 2012</Td>
<td>
November 2015
</Td>
<td>+37</Td>
<td>+9</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>
November 2016
</Td>
<td>
November 2016
</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.3. Timescale Variation

### C.3.3.1 Fire Shadow

### C.3.3.2 Brimstone 2

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>
Variation (+/- Months)
</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>march 2013</Td>
<td>+9</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>further Technical Issues with the TDW Warhead and with the Roxel (UK) Rocket Motor. Warhead; Redesign and Modelling the Consistency of Penetration of the TDW Warhead Lead to Warhead Consistency Firings and UK Design Review to be Scheduled for May 2013; the Aim of the Review is to Close Out Outstanding Design Review Actions Originally Planned for March 2011. Rocket Motor; the Risk Gate Based Approach for the Roxel (UK) Rocket Motor Risk Reduction Testing Encountered a Setback when a Fire Occurred at the Roxel (UK) Site and HSE (Health and Safety Executive) Took Control of Key Test and Inspection Facilities. Revision of Schedule Risk Analysis for the Project to Support a Review Note, Due Submission Q4 2013; Initial Operating Capability Calculated as November 2015.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>+5</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>technical Issues with Warhead and Rocket Motor; Reported in Interim Main Gate 2.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>
+23
</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>further Technical Issues with the Warhead and Significant Technical Issues with Roxel Manufactured Rocket Motor. a Minor Performance Concession Has Been Agreed to Assist in Resolving the Technical Issue with the Rocket Motor.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>net Variation (+/- Months)</Td>
<td>
+37
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### C.3.3.3 Sea Ceptor Demonstration

## C.3.4. Other Costs / Savings Resulting from Timescale Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>date</Th>
<th>£m (+ Cost /
- Saving)</Th>
<th>
Reason for Expenditure or Saving
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>
November 2012
</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td>technical Factors in March 2011 Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone Assets Were Deployed on Operation ELLAMY. This Significantly Increased the Assumed Consumption Rate, Due to an Increase in Operational Firings and Air Carriage Hours. Given this Increased Consumption and Assuming Current Consumption Rates on Operation HERRICK, the Current Stockpile of Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone will be Exhausted by March 2014. This, Combined with the Currently Estimated 24 Month Slip to the Brimstone 2 Project, Leaves the Royal Air Force with a Capability Gap until the Planned End of UK Commitment to Operation HERRICK in December 2014. It also Leaves the UK with a Gap on any Potential Near-Term Contingent Operations, which Require a Low Collateral, Precision Strike Capability. as a Result of These Emerging Capability Gaps, a Decision Point 2 Option, to Provide  Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone, Was Considered [and Approved] by the Defence Board on 19 October 2012.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">total</Td>
<td>14</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3.5. Operational Impact of in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 79%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>operational Impact</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>to Avoid an Unacceptable Operational Impact Arising from the in Service Date Variation it is Planned to Deliver an Initial Operating Capability that will Provide a Fully Functional Spear Capability 2 Capability Utilising Current Brimstone 2 Rocket Motor and Warhead (Non Insensitive Munition Standard) Followed by Full Operating Capability when the Insensitive Munition Rocket Motor Issues Have Been Resolved. Delays to Project Initial Operating Capability Have Been Mitigated by Decision Point 2 Option, Providing a Follow-on Buy of Dual Mode Seeker Brimstone Urgent Operational Requirement Standard Missiles. Initial Operating Capability will be the in Service Date of Brimstone 2 Standard Missiles.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.4. Full Operating Capability

## C.4.1. Definition

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>full Operating Capability</Th>
<th>progress to Date</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability Requirement under Revision as Part of Wider Indirect Fire Precision Attack Programme.</Td>
<td>the Incremental Approach Has Delivered an End- To- End Capability Demonstration which Was Successful in Yielding Information and Understanding that will be Used to Inform Departmental Planning on the Way Forward- Not Just in Relation to Fire Shadow, but the Whole Indirect Fire Precision Attack Project.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>full Operating Capability is Defined As: Full Stockpile on Brimstone 2 Delivered, all Platforms Modified to Utilise Its Full Capability, Sufficient Trained Air and Ground Crews, Full in-Service Support Solution in Place.</Td>
<td>warhead Lethality and Consistency Requirement Achieved. Three Development Firings Completed Successfully. Seeker Trials Completed, Parameter Set Chosen to Enable Final Software Build.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>as for Initial Operating Capability but with all Remaining Type 23 Frigates (X12) Fitted and a Full Missile Stockpile ( Total Warshot Incl Initial ) Delivered.</Td>
<td><ol Type="i">
<li>achievement of Demonstration</Li>
</Ol>

Phase Contract Award to Deliver First of Class Platform - December 2011.

<ol Start="2" Type="i">
<li>successful Completion of The</Li>
</Ol>
System Preliminary Design Review - March 2012.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Sentinel Score

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>fire Shadow</Td>
<td>n/A</Td>
<td>84 GREEN</Td>
<td>following Conclusion of D&amp;M Phase, March 2012, Sentinel Scoring Has Ceased.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>brimstone 2</Td>
<td>78 AMBER</Td>
<td>58 RED</Td>
<td>the Movement from Red to Amber is the Result of Significant Progress Made in Producing a Full Schedule Risk Analysis to Support the Investment Approvals Committee Review Note Submission Planned for Quarter 4 of 2013.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>sea Ceptor Demonstration</Td>
<td>82 GREEN</Td>
<td>84 GREEN</Td>
<td>earned Value Management is a Project Management Technique for Measuring Project Performance and Progress and Forms Part of the Sentinel Score. Where a Project is on Schedule it Has a Schedule Performance Index (SPI) Score of 1. Similarly, where a Project is on Budget it Has a Cost Performance Index (CPI) Score of 1. the CPI for Sea Ceptor D is 0.93 and SPI 0.82 which Shows that the Project is Currently Forecasting to Deliver Slightly Late and Slightly over Budget Against the EVM Baseline, Noting that the EVM Baseline is Three Months Before Approved ISD. the Lower Sentinel Score Reflects This. MBDA is Endeavouring to Recover the Position.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

^d.2.1^ Fire Shadow

Two CPS Requirements Were Reported at-Risk in MPR2012, These Have Now Been Met. Following Changes to the Overarching Indirect Fire Precision Attack Requirement, Arising in Part from Current Operational Experience, Preparations for a New Indirect Fire Precision Attack Assessment Phase are Underway. the Assessment Phase will Consider the Optimum Solution/Solutions to Meet the Revised Indirect Fire Precision Attack Requirement, Including Exploiting Investment to Date Across the Indirect Fire Precision Attack Programme. Reporting Against the Fire Shadow will not be Carried Forward in to Future MPRs. Any Follow on Programme will be Reported as Appropriate.

### D.2.1.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>
Not Met /

Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>equipment Has Been Delivered.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>troop Have Been Trained.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>logistics Requirements Have Been Met, Commensurate with Equipment Delivery</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>facilities (Inc Training Classroom) Commissioned at Albermarle Barracks</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>fire Shadow Troop Formed.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>conops (Concept of Operations) Issued.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>troop Formed for Current Phase. Future Org Plans TBC.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>requirements Have Been Met, Commensurate with Equipment Delivery</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.1.2 Defence Line of Development Variation - N/a

## D.2.2. Brimstone 2

### D.2.2.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>
Not Met /

Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="11"></Td>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>spiral Development of Dual Mode Brimstone. Insensitive Munition Development</Td>
<td>
Yes (with Risks)
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>training Provided for in-Service Users</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>support Provided for in-Service Use</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>infrastructure Sufficient to Support Stockpile at Readiness.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>principles for Capability Employment</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>no Change to Organisation Required.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>data Handling and Transmission Sufficient.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (1)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (1)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="4"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# D.2.2.2

Defence Line of Development Variation

Date

Defence Line of

Development

Category

Historic

Equipment

Technical Factors

# D.2.3

Sea Ceptor D

Reason for Variation

Significant Technical Difficulties

Experienced with Rocket Motor and

Warhead Development are Being

Managed to Minimise the Impact on

Cost, Time and Capability Performance.

### D.2.3.1 Performance Against Defence Lines of Development

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 8%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 17%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>line of Development</Th>
<th>
Description
</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>
Not Met /

Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td Rowspan="11"></Td>
<td>1. Equipment</Td>
<td>delivery, Installation and Acceptance of First of Class System</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>2. Training</Td>
<td>delivery of Operator Training Solution Through Maritime Composite Training System and Maintainer Training Through Computer Based Training Solution.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>3. Logistics</Td>
<td>industrial in-Service Support Solution in Place</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>4. Infrastructure</Td>
<td>defence Munitions Processing Capability in Place.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>5. Personnel</Td>
<td>supply of Sufficient Qualified Personnel</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>6. Doctrine</Td>
<td>principles for Capability Employment</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>7. Organisation</Td>
<td>organisation in Place to Exploit Capability.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>8. Information</Td>
<td>information Interfaces Defined, Proven and Accredited</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
8 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.2.3.2 Defence Line of Development Variation

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures

## D.3.1. Fire Shadow

### D.3.1.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Key Performance
</Th>
<th>
Related Defence
</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to
</Th>
<th>not Met /</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>measure</Td>
<td>lines of Development</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
Be Met (with Risks)
</Td>
<td>forecast not to be Met</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 226</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>man in the Loop Operation</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 273</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>range from Control Node</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>cps 279</Th>
<th>all</Th>
<th>prosecution of Target</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>cps 285</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>operate in Climatic Zones</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 431</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>control Node Transportable in Transit Cases</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 361</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>capable of Operating in Daylight</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 416</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>prosecution of Target</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 278</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>endurance Including Transit</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 432</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>each Control Node Package be a Maximum  Man Lift</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 362</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>capable of Operating During Darkness</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 346</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>image of Sufficient Quality at </Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 546</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>responsiveness at Range</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 547</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>responsiveness at Range</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 536</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>control Node Communications in all Azimuths</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 390</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>engagement per Control Node</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 289</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>specified Munition Altitude Ceiling</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 388</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td> Launchers per Hour, per Node</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 385</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>control Node into Action less than Hours</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 433</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>control Node Operated from </Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 543</Td>
<td>all</Td>
<td>moving Target- Prosecution of Target</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>cps 415</Td>
<td>logistics</Td>
<td>no Need for Dedicated Handling or Loading Equipment</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 230
</Td>
<td>
LOGISTICS
</Td>
<td>control Node Transportable Internally by CH47</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 425
</Td>
<td>
LOGISTICS
</Td>
<td>launch Node Transportable Internally by CH47</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
CPS 434
</Td>
<td>
LOGISTICS
</Td>
<td>munitions Transportable Internally by CH47</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
24 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
24 (2)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>june 2012</Td>
<td>cps 285</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the CPS Requirement Was Achieved with Limitations in March 2012, as Reported in MPR12. the Limitations Were Removed in June 2012, Following the Receipt of Roxel Boost Motor Qualification Evidence and the Subsequent Addendum to the Part 2 Safety Case Report</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>june 2012</Td>
<td>cps 434</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>the CPS Requirement Was Achieved with Limitations in March 2012, as Reported in MPR12. the Limitations Were Removed in June 2012, Following the Receipt of Roxel Boost Motor Qualification Evidence and the Subsequent Addendum to the Part 2 Safety Case Report.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.1.3 Operational Impact of Variation - N/a

## D.3.2. Brimstone 2

### D.3.2.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur1, UR 1.1</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Requires a Capability that is Effective Against the Specified Target Set at the Stipulated Max Range.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>kur2, UR 1.4</Th>
<th>equipment</Th>
<th>the User Requires a Weapon that can Achieve a Lethal Effect Against a Wide Variety of Target Types.</Th>
<th>yes</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur3, UR 1.7</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Complex Scenarios with a High Degree of Confidence that Only the Intended Targets will be Engaged.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur4, UR 1.9</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring Targets.</Td>
<td>yes (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur5, UR 1.14</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Environments where Collateral Damage Issues Exist</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur7, UR 1.16</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>the User Requires that Data be Provided to Dstl to Enable the Theatre Command Structure to Complete Collateral Damage Assessment as Part of the Target Clearance Process for Pre-Planned Missions.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur10, UR 1.46</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Requires a Capability that Allows an Engagement to be Aborted after Launch</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 11, UR 2.1</Td>
<td>operational and Logistical</Td>
<td>the User Required the all-Up-Round to be Compliant with the External Profile, Mass and Centre of Gravity (Including Tolerances) for the Specified in Service Weapon Warhead</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 12, UR 3.27</Td>
<td>operational and Logistical</Td>
<td>the User Requires that the Warhead be Compatible with the in-Service Components and Equipment Associated with Legacy Weapons as Stated.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (3)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="2">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>9 (1)</Td>
<td>0</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.2 Key Performance Measures Variation

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>date</Th>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>category</Th>
<th>reason for Variation</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
December 2012
</Td>
<td>kur1, UR 1.1. the User Requires a Capability that is Effective Against the Specified Target Set at the Stipulated Max Range.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>batch 5 (Dec 12) &amp; 6 Warhead Proof and Tandem Firings Successfully Completed May 13 to Prove Consistency; Further Tandem Firings are Planned Sept 13 to Provide Additional Evidence. Rocket Motor Design Meets Max Range Requirement but the Design is Still to be Proven Through the Rocket Motor Recovery Programme and Qualification.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>february 2013</Td>
<td>kur3, UR 1.7. the User Requires the Ability to Engage Targets in Complex Scenarios with a High Degree of Confidence that Only the Intended Targets will be Engaged.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>analysis of the Seeker Quarry Trial in Feb 13, Conducted to Optimise DualMode Software, is Ongoing and Subsequent Seeker Performance Modelling will be Validated Through the DEV 2 Trial (to Take Place Sep-Oct 13).</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>february 2013</Td>
<td>kur4, UR 1.9. the User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring Targets.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>analysis of the Seeker Quarry Trial in Feb 13, Conducted to Optimise DualMode Software, is Ongoing and Subsequent Seeker Performance Modelling will be Vallidated Through the DEV 2 Trial (to Take Place Sep-Oct 13) Subject to IAC RN Approval.</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>historic</Td>
<td>kur4, UR 1.9; the User Requires a Single Weapon to be Able to Effectively Prosecute Moving / Manoeuvring Targets.</Td>
<td>
Technical Factors
</Td>
<td>mpr13: Analysis of the Seeker Quarry Trial in February 2013, Conducted to Optimise Dual-Mode Software, is Ongoing and Subsequent Seeker Performance Modelling will be Validated Through the DEV 2 Trial (to Take Place Sep-Oct 2013) Subject to Investment Approvals Committee Review Note Approval. the Urgent Operational Requirement Weapon Configuration on which Brimstone 2 is Based Was not Formally Assessed under Trials Conditions Due to the Rapid Timescales.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.2.3 Operational Impact of Variation - N/a

## D.3.3. Sea Ceptor Demonstration

### D.3.3.1 Performance Against Key Performance Measures

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>key Performance Measure</Th>
<th>related Defence Lines of Development</Th>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Met / Forecast to be Met (with Risks)
</Th>
<th>not Met /
Forecast not to be Met</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>kur 1</Td>
<td>
Equipment Doctrine
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Air Threats Targeting the Host Platform.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 2</Td>
<td>
Equipment Doctrine
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Air Threats Targeting the Defended Asset.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 3</Td>
<td>
Equipment Doctrine
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Neutralise the Stand-Off Air Threat.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 4</Td>
<td>
Equipment Doctrine
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Control the Engagement.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 5</Td>
<td>equipment</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Able to Utilise in Environmental Conditions.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>kur 6</Td>
<td>equipment Information</Td>
<td>the User Shall Integrate to the Host Platform.</Td>
<td>yes</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 7
</Td>
<td>
Information
</Td>
<td>the Communication and Information System Interoperability Elements of the Solution to this User Requirement Document Shall be Acquired in Accordance with MOD Communication and Information System Policy.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 8
</Td>
<td>personnel Organisation</Td>
<td>the User Shall Utilise with Available Manning.</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 9
</Td>
<td>
Training
</Td>
<td>the User Shall be Trained to Utilise</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
KUR 10
</Td>
<td>
Logistics Equipment
</Td>
<td>the User Shall Complete Missions without Critical Failure</Td>
<td>
Yes
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">current Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
10 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">last Year’s Forecast (with Risks)</Td>
<td>
10 (0)
</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

### D.3.3.2 Key Performance Measures Variation - N/a

### D.3.3.3 Operational Impact of Variation - N/a

## D.4. Support Contract - N/a
