---
Year: 2008.0
Project_type: Pre-Main Gate
Project: UNITED KINGDOM MILITARY FLYING TRAINING SYSTEM
Page_from: 219.0
Page_to: 220.0
Project_label: United Kingdom Military Flying Training System
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2008_219_220.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

| Picture not Available. |
|----------------------------|

UNITED KINGDOM

MILITARY FLYING

TRAINING SYSTEM

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

UNITED KINGDOM MILITARY FLYING TRAINING SYSTEM

Single Point of Accountability for Project Capability: Director Equipment Capability (Theatre Airspace)

Senior Responsible Owner for Broader Capability:

Capability Manager (Precision Attack)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT the REQUIREMENT

United Kingdom Military Flying Training System will Deliver a Coherent, Flexible and Integrated Flying Training Capability Catering for the Needs of the Royal Navy, the Royal Air Force and the Army Air Corps. the Flying Training System Takes Aircrew from Initial Training Through Elementary, Basic and Advanced Flying Training Phases to their Arrival at their Designated Operational Aircraft. the Current System is at Risk of Being Unable to Deliver the Required Quantity and Quality of Aircrew to Meet the Input Standard for the Operational Conversion Units. the Existing Training Platforms are Approaching the End of their Useful Lives and Include Outdated Systems that are Unable to Prepare Trainees for Current and Future Front Line Aircraft. the Current System is Based on a Number of Separate Contractual Arrangements for the Provision of Equipment and Support. Consequently the System is Piecemeal, Difficult to Manage and Inefficient. It also Introduces Significant Delays Due to Lengthy Training Programmes and Gaps Between Courses.

The Focus for United Kingdom Military Flying Training System is to Achieve a Holistic System Based on Capability and Service Delivery; it is not Solely About the Provision of Aircraft Platforms. It also Offers an Opportunity to Modernise the Flying Training Processes for all Three Services, Realise Efficiencies And, Since Training is Currently Spread Across Several Organisations, Take Advantage of Potential Economies of Scale.

213

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in Service Dates and Costs are not Set until Projects Reach the Point in Time when the Main Investment Decision is Made i.e. Main Gate Approval. Until this Point all Costs and Dates are Outline Assumptions Solely for Internal Planning Purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

Four Possible Procurement Options Were Identified at Initial Gate. the Do-Nothing Option Was Discounted. the Do Minimum Option Would not Deliver the Required Quality and Quantity of Students in the Correct Timescales. the Remaining Options, Public Private Partnership/Private Finance Initiative and Smart Conventional, Were Tested in a Convergence Phase which Concluded that the Adoption of a Public Private Partnership Contractual Partnering Model Would Best Harness the Collective Skills of MoD and Industry by Utilising a Mix of Private Finance Initiative and Conventional Procurement to Deliver a Coherent and Flexible System of Systems.

This Option Envisaged the Appointment of a Training System Partner to Work with the MoD over the Life of the Project to Deliver Incrementally the Total Aircrew Training Requirement. the Strategy Was Approved by Investment Approvals Board in February 2005. an Invitation to Negotiate Was Issued to Three Consortia in March 2005; the Bids Were Received in August 2005. the Main Gate Business Case (Stage 1) Was Approved by Investment Approvals Board and Ascent Was Announced as Preferred Bidder in November 2006. Final Contractual Negotiations are Underway. Main Gate (Stage 2) Submission in the Form of an Information Note Was Submitted in December 2007. This Was Approved by Minister (Defence Equipment and Support) and Treasury in February 2008.

Additional Assessment Work will be Required Post-Main Gate for the Different Training Platforms that will be Acquired Incrementally. These Increments will be Subject to Further Approvals.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (Outturn Prices)
</Th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>forecast Cost</Td>
<td>
32
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>approved Cost at Initial Gate</Td>
<td>
39
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>variation</Td>
<td>
-7
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2c. Explanation of the Need and Boundaries of Current Internal Planning Assumptions for Introduction of the Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Earliest
</Th>
<th>
Latest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope Within which Capability will be Available</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td Colspan="3">this Project will Provide the MoD with a Coherent, Tri-Service Training Capability, to be Acquired Incrementally, Replacing the Current Disjointed Contractual Arrangements.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## 2d. Boundaries of Current Internal Cost Assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 50%" />
<col Style="Width: 25%" />
<col Style="Width: 24%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th>
Lowest
</Th>
<th>
Highest
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>envelope of Costs to Support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

214
