---
Year: 2012.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Core Production Capability
Page_from: 352.0
Page_to: 357.0
Project_label: Core Production Capability
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2012_352_357.md
---
FALSE

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 65%" />
<col Style="Width: 34%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Title
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Core Production Capability
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Nuclear Propulsion Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td>
Date Appointed
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Cdre Beverstock
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td>current Status of Projects /</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Core Production Capability
</Td>
<td>pre-Main Investment Decision FALSE</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

CORE PRODUCTION CAPABILITY

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

To Maintain a Naval Reactor Core Production Capability (CPC) to Support the UK’s Nuclear Submarine Flotilla. All Royal Navy Submarine Propulsion Nuclear Reactor Cores Have Been Manufactured at the RollsRoyce (RR) Raynesway Site.

To Conduct Nuclear Operations on the Raynesway Site, Rolls-Royce Marine Power Operations Limited is ‘licensed’ Formally by the Health and Safety Executive (Nuclear Department) (HSE(ND)) as Required by the Nuclear Installations Act.

The Technological and Manufacturing Capability to Produce Submarine Reactor Cores Has Traditionally Been Sustained Through Successive Contracts for their Production. with the Introduction of Long Life Cores and the Reduction in the Submarine Flotilla Size the Numerical Requirement for Cores Has Reduced.

The Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) White Paper Deferred the in-Service Date (ISD) for the Successor SSBN to 2028 with a 36 Month Drumbeat.

## A.2. Assessment Phase History

In September 2007, the Investment Appraisals Board Approved the Core Production Capability Initial Gate Business Case, to Down Select to the Phased Regeneration of the Rolls-Royce Raynesway Site, as the Most Cost Effective Way of Delivering the Capability.

The Assessment Phase Contract Was Let on 13th February 2008. the Contract Covers Assessment Phase Work Up to February 2010.

Interim Contract Placed on 4th February 2010 to Cover Work Required to Complete Assessment Phase Activities.

## A.3. in-Year Progress

Support Continued with Assessment Phase Related Work Throughout the Year, with Work Completed Including:

1.  2 Years Operation and Maintenance of the Current Facilities. This is Essential to Ensure that the Nuclear Site License is Maintained.

2.  Maturing the Design of the Manfacturing Facility and Equipment. This Work is Essential to Allow Construction to Start as Planned to Support the Programme.

3.  Enabling Works Complete - Fencing and New Security Gates Etc. This is Part of the Work on the Nuclear Licensed Site Boundary to Maintain Security Requirements and to Provide Site Access for Future Regeneration Works on the Site.

4.  Significant Value Engineering Undertaken and Developed. the Work Has Continued the Value for Money Exercises, with Regard to the Design of the Manufacturing Facility and Product Assembly Building .

Main Phase Contract Negotiations Commenced in June 2011.

CORE PRODUCTION CAPABILITY

CORE PRODUCTION CAPABILITY

## A.4. Capability Risks

Cancellation of the CPC Project Means that There Would be No Nuclear Reactor Cores for the Successor Programme or any Future Nuclear Submarine Programme.

Delivery of the CPC Project is Essential in Order to Manufacture Reactor Cores for the Submarine Programme, Support Development Work on the Successor Core Design and Manufacturing Processes and Maintain the Site Nuclear Licence and Essential Manufacturing and Engineering Skills, that Would Require Significant Time and Cost to Recover and Therefore Represent an Intolerable Risk to the Successor Deterrent Core Production Schedule and Subsequent in-Service Date.

## A.5. Associated Projects

<table Style="Width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 59%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Title of Associated

Project</Th>
<th>forecast in Service Date/ Initial Operating Capability</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>successor (Incl Next Generation Nuclear Propulsion Plant)</Td>
<td>isd of 2028</Td>
<td>pre-Main Gate</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 4</Td>
<td>isd of 2018 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 5</Td>
<td>isd of 2020 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 6</Td>
<td>isd of 2022 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>astute Boat 7</Td>
<td>isd of 2024 - Handover to Royal Navy</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="3">pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project /
Increment Title
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">
Procurement Route
</Td>
<td>
Approval Status
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Core Production Capability
</Td>
<td Colspan="3">single Source</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="3">post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments Only</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project / Increment Title
</Td>
<td>
Contractor
</Td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</Td>
<td>contract Type</Td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Core Production Capability
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

CORE PRODUCTION CAPABILITY

# B. Section B: Cost

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 49%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>
Previous Expenditure to 31 March 2011

(£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>total Expenditure to

31 March 2012

(£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>75</Td>
<td>32</Td>
<td>107</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration and Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>-</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>75</Td>
<td>32</Td>
<td>107</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Rowspan="2"></Th>
<th Colspan="2">post-Main Investment</Th>
</Tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved Cost
</Th>
<th></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>project/
Increment Title</Td>
<td>approved Cost (£m)</Td>
<td>
Forecast Cost

(£m)</Td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</Td>
<td>as a

Proportion of

Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
<td>actual Cost as a Proportion of Total Estimated Procurement

Expenditure

(%)</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>107</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Planned Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase /
PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 33%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>lowest Forecast (£m)</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast (£m)
</Th>
<th>highest Forecast (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase - Not Applicable

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / PFI Cost - Not Applicable

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Date of Main Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment Phase
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td>
September 2007
</Td>
<td>
April 2012
</Td>
<td>
55
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 40%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Title</Th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for Forecast
</Th>
<th>
Latest Forecast
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>core Production Capability</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>
-
</Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.4. Full Operating Capability - Not Applicable

## C.5. Support / PFI Contract - Not Applicab

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Current Score
</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>
Scale
</Th>
<th>
Comments
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
5.25
</Td>
<td>
N/a
</Td>
<td>
1-10
</Td>
<td>trl Data Focussed on 20 Key Equipments. Phase 1 Equipment (13 Items) is on Average of 5.23. Phase 2 Equipment (7 Items) is on Average of 5.28. Overall Average is 5.25.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2.1. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development - Not Applicable

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures - Not Applicable

## D.4. Support Contract - Not Applicable
