---
year: 2011.0
project_type: Assessment phase projects
project: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
page_from: 316.0
page_to: 321.0
project_label: Type 26 Global Combat Ship
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2011_316_321.md
---
| Project Title            |                                             |
|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Type 26 Global Combat Ship   |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Team Responsible         |                                             |
| Type 26 Global Combat Ship   |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Senior Responsible Owner |                                             |
| Capability Above Water Head  |                                             |
|                              |                                             |
| Project/Increment Name   | Current Status of Projects / Increments |
| Type 26 Global Combat Ship   | Pre-Main Investment Decision                |
|                              |                                             |

1.  <u>Section A: The Project</u>

1.  The Requirement

There is a need to replace the 13 Type 23 surface combatant capability before the safe operating standard for legacy ships is withdrawn and the platforms become obsolete. This enduring requirement will be delivered by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship, which emerged from the Strategic Defence and Security Review.

The Type 26 Global Combat Ship is a globally deployable and sustainable warship that will form the spine of the Royal Navy’s future fleet. It is a task group enabled Anti-Submarine Warfare warship and will combine the capabilities necessary to protect maritime task groups, the strategic deterrent and land forces, with the flexibility to conduct a wide range of other tasks. The Type 26 Global Combat Ship retains the combat power that had been provisioned for the Type 26 (C1) originally, whilst enhancing endurance and intelligence gathering attributes.

Legacy Ships were designed for an 18 year life but this has been extended to almost twice the original design life. The current planning assumption is to replace the ships under the Type 26 Global Combat Ship programme, currently based on one class of up to 13 ships delivered in two variants; anti-submarine warfare and general purpose vessels.

1.  The Assessment Phase

The Sustained Surface Combatant Capability pathfinder project recommended a two-class solution for Future Surface Combatant. The first class, Type 26 (C1), is a task-group enabled anti-submarine warfare frigate. The second, C2, is a general purpose frigate. Sustained Surface Combatant Capability Pathfinder highlighted a need for up to ten Type 26 (C1) and eight C2s. Type 26 (C1) was to be built first at a rate of one per year, followed by C2. This approach met the needs of industrial sustainability whilst fulfilling the Royal Navy requirement.

It was on this basis that the Concept Phase progressed and formed the basis of the Initial Gate approval for Type 26 (C1) on 18 March 2010. It was anticipated that Main Gate would be in Quarter 4 2013 and estimated that for a ten ship class the procurement cost would be
\\\ (inclusive of VAT and inflation), with a whole life cost of
\\\ (inclusive of VAT and inflation), assuming a ship life of 25 years. It was also recognised that there would be a Strategic Defence and Security Review following the General Election. Subsequently as part of the approval, it was planned that there would be a mid-phase review point to assess the impact of any changes in policy driven by that Review.

The Approved budgetary level (VAT inc) for the non-competitive procurement of the assessment work at 50% confidence, consisted of
£158.4M total direct resource consumption. The approval from the Investment Approvals Board capped the "not to exceed" value of the Assessment Phase at this 50% level. All non-UK new design and build options were discounted at the Initial Gate, as recorded in the Investment Appraisal, noting the over-arching agreement with BAE Systems in the BAE Systems Surface Ships Terms of Business Agreement (dated 21 July 2009). This was questioned in the initial Investment Appraisal Board note and examined in the Information Note.

Type 26 (C1) is expected to be procured without competition from BAE Systems Surface Ships under the terms of the BAE Systems Surface Ships Terms of Business Agreement (Dated 21 July 2009). A joint team is now in place and working at a number of BAE sites, primarily in Glasgow and Filton (where the MOD members of the joint team are based). As part of this, it is intended that approval for a commitment to the support solution, including costs from the supply chain, will be sought at the Main Gate approval in Quarter 4 2013.

# A.3 Progress

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Following the General Election the Strategic Defence and Security Review has had a profound effect on Type 26 Global Combat Ship. The result of the Strategic Defence and Security Review was a change to a Type 26 Global Combat Ship design that is smaller, less capable and more exportable whilst still maintaining the needs of industrial sustainability. The Strategic Defence and Security Review reduced the total surface fleet to 19 frigates and destroyers which will include six Type 45 destroyers and the current Type 23 frigates which will be replaced by Type 26 Global Combat Ship after 2020. This has reduced the overall procurement cost of the programme from  to . The alignment of renamed Type 26 Global Combat Ship against the goals of the Strategic Defence and Security Review has been confirmed in an Information Note submitted to the Investment Approval Board in January 2011. This Information Note stated that:
<ol type="a">
<li>Approval will be split into two parts. Approval (Main Gate 1) will seek endorsement of the requirements to be delivered by Type 26 GCS, with Main Gate 2, the main investment decision following in Quarter 4 2013. This will allow detailed costing and design work to proceed against a defined requirement so that the project will be ready for approval at Main Gate 2 and subsequent contract signing;</li>
<li>The remaining programme key milestones remain unchanged, with planned service entry as soon as possible after 2020;</li>
<li>Type 26 Global Combat Ship is considered to be a highly exportable surface combatant with considerable effort being expended to encourage overseas partner interest.</li>
</ol>
In order to maximise Type 26 Global Combat Ship export potential to realise wider benefits to the MOD, industry and the UK, engagement has begun with several countries to determine their requirements and how these can be matched with Type 26 Global Combat Ship. The design is being developed in close partnership with industry to improve the opportunities for these requirements to be realised in the design.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

# A.4 Capability Risks

Strategic Defence and Security Review confirmed the need for Future Force 2020 to provide maritime defence of the UK and its South Atlantic Overseas Territories. Capabilities should include a surface fleet of 19 frigates and destroyers providing military flexibility across a variety of operations, including six Type 45 destroyers and the current Type 23 frigates. However there is a need to replace the Type 22 and Type 23 surface combatant capability before the safe operating standard for legacy ships is withdrawn and the platforms become obsolete.

Legacy ships were designed for an 18 year life but this has been extended to almost twice the original design life. There is no scope to extend the current platforms further without extensive unaffordable modifications. There is no scope to extend these concessions without unaffordable modification. If further extension was required the hull strength, stability and legislative safety compliance must be addressed by work that removes capability, does not reduce the risk to the generation of forces at readiness and costs more than a new build option. The Strategic Defence and Security Review. The Strategic Defence and Security Review confirmed that as soon as possible after 2020 the Type 23 will be replaced by the Type 26 Global Combat Ship which will be designed to be easily adapted to change roles and capabilities depending on the strategic circumstances.

# A.5 Associated Projects

# A.6 Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 57%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th colspan="2">
Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects / Increments only
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment

Title</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
<td>Approval Status</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Type 26 Global Combat Ship</td>
<td>Single Source</td>
<td>Pre-Main Gate</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# A.7 Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">
Description
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">
Currently there are seven options being considered that will provide the support for Type 26 Global Combat Ship, the preferred solution being the Surface Ship Support Agreement. As detailed in the Foundation Milestone Review in March 2011, the Assessment Phase approval covers funding for Concept and Assessment Phase Support activities. The Assessment Phase contract was placed non-competitively under the BAE Systems Surface Ships Terms of Business Agreement. An approval will be sought (termed Main Gate 1) after the initial Analysis of Options period of the Assessment Phase. In addition to this and at the same time, approval will be sought for the Support Solution. Main Gate 1 approval will provide an agreed position for the detailed design and cost model to mature and develop for the full approval to commit to Design and Manufacture and In Service Support at Main Gate 2. Under the Terms of Business Agreement BAE Systems will lead a team consisting of Babcock Marine amongst others to provide the through-life maintenance and support under the Surface Ship Support Agreement.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Title</td>
<td>
Contractor
</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>
Procurement Route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>In-Service Support Contract for Type 26 Global Combat Ship</td>
<td>
BAE Systems
</td>
<td>
Support
</td>
<td>
Prime Contractor
</td>
<td>
Single Source
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

TYPE 26 GLOBAL COMBAT SHIP

1.  <u>Section B: Cost</u>

1.  Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th rowspan="2"></th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost
</th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/
Increment Title</td>
<td>
Approved Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>Actual /

Forecast Cost

(£m)</td>
<td>
Variation (£m)
</td>
<td>as a

proportion of

total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
<td>Actual Cost as a proportion of total estimated procurement

expenditure

(%)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Type 26 Global Combat Ship</td>
<td>158</td>
<td>156</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total (£m)</td>
<td>158</td>
<td>156</td>
<td>-2</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Lowest</th>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Project/Increment Title</td>
<td>Forecast /
Approved (£m)</td>
<td>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only) (£m)</td>
<td>Highest

Forecast /
Approved (£m)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Type 26 Global Combat Ship</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

2.  Unit production cost/Quantities required

3.  Progress against approved Support / Service / PFI Cost

4.  Expenditure to date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 49%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Previous expenditure to 31 March 2010

(£m)</th>
<th>In-year expenditure (£m)</th>
<th>Total expenditure to

31 March 2011

(£m)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total Expenditure</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Project Summary Sheet

TYPE 26 GLOBAL COMBAT SHIP

1.  <u>Section C: Timescale</u>

1.  Duration of the Assessment Phase

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Investment Decision Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (+/- months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Type 26 Global Combat Ship</td>
<td>March 2010</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Planned / Actual Boundaries for In Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Project/Increment Title</th>
<th>
Earliest Forecast /

Approved</th>
<th>Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)</th>
<th>
Latest Forecast /

Approved</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Type 26 Global Combat Ship</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  In-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability

2.  Full Operating Capability

3.  Support / Service / PFI Contract

Project Summary Sheet
