---
Year: 2014.0
Project_type: Assessment Phase Projects
Project: Crowsnest
Page_from: 211.0
Page_to: 216.0
Project_label: Crowsnest
Project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
Filenm: Naomprss_2014_211_216.md
---
<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 37%" />
<col Style="Width: 11%" />
<col Style="Width: 28%" />
<col Style="Width: 22%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
Project Name
</Th>
<th></Th>
<th Colspan="2"></Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Crowsnest
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Team Responsible
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Merlin Project Team
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Senior Responsible Owner
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>date Appointed</Td>
<td>planned End Date</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Rear Admiral Russ Harding
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td>22 November 2013</Td>
<td>may 2015</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project/Increment Name
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">current Status of Projects /
Increments</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>
Crowsnest
</Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2">pre-Main Investment Decision</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td Colspan="2"></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. the Requirement

The Requirement for an Airborne Surveillance and Control Capability Emerged from the Need to Provide an Organic Long Range Airborne Surveillance, Control and Early Warning Capability to Carrier Enabled Power Projection, Littoral Manoeuvre, and Maritime Task Groups at all Scales of Operation. the CROWSNEST Project is to Succeed the Capability Currently Provided by the Sea King Mk7 Airborne Surveillance and

Control Aircraft which Has a Planned Out of Service Date of September 2018, Extended from

31 March 2016. the Primary Purpose of this Capability is to Provide Organic Force Protection for Maritime Task Groups and their Forward Deployed Task Elements, Including Wide Area Surveillance Overland and in the Littoral Environment. Following the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review, the CROWSNEST Capability is Required to be Delivered as a Role-Fit Mission System Integrated into the Merlin Mk2. the CROWSNEST Project will Procure 10 Role-Fit Mission Systems, and Convert all 30 Merlin Mk2 Aircraft to Make Them “fit-to-Receive” the CROWSNEST Role-Fit Equipment.

## A.2. the Assessment Phase

The CROWSNEST Assessment Phase is Planned to Run from March 2013 Through to a Main Gate Investment Decision in April 2016, at an Expected Cost of
£34m. the Purpose of the Assessment Phase is to Select a Mission System Supplier from Two Competing Solutions, One Provided by Lockheed Martin UK, and One Provided by Thales UK. the Assessment Phase Competition is Being Managed by Lockheed Martin UK in their Role as the Merlin Mk2 Design Organisation, and Appropriate Firewall Procedures and MOD Oversight Have Been Established to Ensure that Lockheed Martin Run an Open and Fair Competition in which They are also Competing. Down Selection to the Winning Mission System Supplier is Expected in Spring 2015.

## A.3. Project History Up to 31 March 2013

The 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review Directed that the UK’s Future Maritime Airborne Surveillance and Control Capability Was to be Provided via Role-Fit Equipment for Installation on the Merlin Mk2 under the Maritime Force Protection Optimisation Planning Round 2011 Option. During Activity to Seek Approval to Commence the Assessment Phase for this Project, Planning Round 2012 Decisions Introduced a Four Year Delay to the Planned Delivery Date for the Capability, with a Planned in Service Date of April 2020. Review Note Approval to Commence the Project Was Obtained in March 2013, and a £3m Limit of Liability Initial Phase of the Assessment Phase Commenced in March 2013.

## A.4. in-Year Progress

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>following Commencement of Initial Phase of the CROWSNEST Assessment Phase in March 2013, Outline Solution Concepts Were Received from the Competing Mission System Suppliers, and These Were the Subject of a Helicopters Operating Centre Senior Management Review in Defence Equipment and Support. This Review Confirmed that the Project Should Proceed into the Full Phase of the Assessment Phase. in Parallel, Work Conducted by Navy Command and Defence Equipment and Support Identified an Opportunity to Accelerate the Project by 18 Months, for a Revised in Service Date of October 2018. This Accelerated Programme Was Adopted in Autumn 2013, and the £24m Full Phase Contract Award with Lockheed Martin Was Placed in September 2013. in February 2014 Each Competing Mission System Supplier Held Successful Initial Design Reviews, and Two Further Reviews are Planned in July and November as the Designs Mature, Leading to Delivery of Mission System Supplier Proposals at the End of January 2015, and a Downselect Decision by April 2015.</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.5. Capability Risks

The Requirement is Driven by the Need to Provide Force Protection of the Carrier Enabled Power Projection, Littoral Manoeuvre and Maritime Task Groups, Including Forward Deployed Force Elements.

The Procurement of the CROWSNEST Capability Mitigates Other Intelligence, Surveillance, Targeting, Acquisition and Reconnaissance Capability Gaps by Providing an Assured Surveillance Capability to Detect Inbound Threats. Without this Capability the Task Group will Have Reduced Situational Awareness of Air and Surface Threats at Range, and will Have Reduced Warning Time to Counter any Inbound Threats.

## A.6. Associated Projects

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Forecast in Service Date / Initial Operating Capability
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Mk2 Capability Sustainment Programme</Td>
<td>
June 2014 in Service Date – Achieved 29<sup>th</Sup> May 2014
</Td>
<td>
Post-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>queen Elizabeth Class Carriers</Td>
<td>
Q1 2018 in Service Date for the Queen Elizabeth Vessel Q4 2020 Initial Operating Capability for Queen Elizabeth in the Carrier Strike Role
</Td>
<td>
Post-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.7. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 23%" />
<col Style="Width: 56%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Procurement Route
</Th>
<th>
Approval Status
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>crowsnest</Td>
<td>
Sole Source to the Merlin Mk2 Design Organisation (Lockheed Martin)
</Td>
<td>
Pre-Main Gate
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## A.8. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 100%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>merlin Mk2 Support is Currently Provided Through the Integrated Merlin Operational Support Contract with AgustaWestland as Prime Contractor in Concert with Other Key Industry Partners Such as Lockheed Martin, Selex, and Thales. It is Intended that CROWSNEST Support will be Added to this Support Arrangement for Pricing Period 4, which is Scheduled to Commence in April 2020. Prior to This, Lockheed Martin will be Responsible for Providing the Initial in-Service Support under the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase Prime Contract.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>approved Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>actual /
Forecast Cost (£m)</Th>
<th>variation (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>crowsnest</Td>
<td>43</Td>
<td>34</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total (£m)</Td>
<td>43</Td>
<td>34</Td>
<td>-9</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## B.2. Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase / PFI

| Project/Increment Name | Lowest Approved (£m) | Budgeted for (£m) | Highest Approved (£m) |
|-------------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|
| Crowsnest                  | \\\               | \\\            | \\\                |

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture Phase – N/a

## B.4. Progress Against Approved Support / Training / PFI Cost – N/a

## B.5. Expenditure to Date

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 18%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>description</Th>
<th>previous Expenditure to 31 March 2013 (£m)</Th>
<th>in-Year Expenditure (£m)</Th>
<th>
Total Expenditure to

31 March 2014 (£m)</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>assessment Phase</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
13
</Td>
<td>
14
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>demonstration &amp; Manufacture Phase</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>support Phase / Service / PFI Cost</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>0</Td>
<td>
0
</Td>
</Tr>
<tr>
<td>total Expenditure</Td>
<td>1</Td>
<td>
13
</Td>
<td>
14
</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Length of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 43%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>
Date of Initial Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Actual Date of Main Investment Decision Approval
</Th>
<th>
Length of Assessment Phase (Months)
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>crowsnest</Td>
<td>
March 2013
</Td>
<td>

</Td>
<td>

</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.2. Planned / Actual Boundaries for in Service Date or Initial Operating Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 44%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
<col Style="Width: 16%" />
<col Style="Width: 19%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>project/Increment Name</Th>
<th>earliest Approved</Th>
<th>
Budgeted for
</Th>
<th>
Latest Approved
</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>crowsnest</Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
<td></Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## C.3. in-Service Date/Initial Operating Capability – N/a

## C.4. Full Operating Capability – N/a

## C.5. Support / Training / PFI Contract – N/a

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Technology Readiness Level

<table>
<colgroup>
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 20%" />
<col Style="Width: 39%" />
</Colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>current Score</Th>
<th>
Last Years Score
</Th>
<th>scale</Th>
<th>comments</Th>
</Tr>
</Thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>na</Td>
<td>na</Td>
<td>na</Td>
<td>due to the Current Status of the Competitive Assessment Phase, it is not Possible to Evaluate Technology Readiness Level for the Project at this Time, as it is Different for the Different Solutions, and is the Subject of Ongoing Trials Activity to Raise the Level. an Evaluation will be Possible when the Preferred Mission System is Selected in April 2015, with the Aim to Achieve Level 6/7 by Main Gate in April 2016.</Td>
</Tr>
</Tbody>
</Table>

## D.2. Performance Against Defence Lines of Development (DLOD) – N/a

## D.3. Performance Against Key Performance Measures (KPM) – N/a

## D.4. Support Contract – N/a
