---
year: 2008.0
project_type: pre-main gate
project: EAGLE
page_from: 189.0
page_to: 192.0
project_label: EAGLE
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2008_189_192.md
---
PRE MAIN GATE PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

EAGLE

Integrated Project Team Responsible:

SENTRY

Single Point of Accountability for project capability:

Director Equipment Capability (Intelligence Surveillance Target Acquisition & Reconnaissance)

Senior Responsible Owner for broader capability:

Capability Manager (Information Superiority)

# SECTION 1: ABOUT THE REQUIREMENT

The Royal Air Force’s fleet of E-3D Sentry aircraft entered service in 1992 to provide an Airborne Early Warning capability, through extended surveillance for air attack and limited functions to control and direct air operations. During successive operations it was identified that an Air Warning and Control System capability (to carry out surveillance, provide communications and command and control air battles) was required. The lack of an Air Battle Management capability (including the control of defensive and offensive fighter aircraft, management of air-toair refuelling and de-confliction and safety of friendly aircraft) and deficiencies in Electronic Support Measures (sensors for detection of electronic pulses emitted by aircraft, missiles, ground based and maritime radar systems), together with equipment obsolescence issues, were identified as barriers to providing future Defence capability. Project Eagle will upgrade the mission system by replacing the onboard computer hardware and software, and the operator consoles. The Electronic Support Measures will also be replaced along with elements of the communications systems. The project will also provide ground based simulation, mission planning and support facilities, combined with an Integrated Logistic Support package, which includes the training of operators, the provision of technical manuals, and a United Kingdom repair/replacement service.

During the concept phase, other nations’ E-3 upgrade programmes were investigated to determine their suitability for providing the required capability and all were dismissed on either technical and/or financial grounds. Studies indicated that industry could provide a solution and a competitive acquisition approach was proposed in the Initial Gate Business Case.

# SECTION 2: THE ASSESSMENT PHASE

Note: Actual in-service dates and costs are not set until projects reach the point in time when the main investment decision is made i.e. Main gate approval. Until this point all costs and dates are outline assumptions solely for internal planning purposes.

## 2a. Description of the Assessment Phase

The approval of the Initial Gate business case endorsed a competitive acquisition strategy and, in January 2005, six potential Prime Contractors were invited to submit proposals to satisfy the Eagle capability and user needs, based on a detailed set of system requirements.

In May 2005, recognising that some elements of the communications systems on the aircraft were forecast to become obsolescent, the scope of project Eagle was amended to include the replacement of those elements. This was approved by the Investment Approvals Board in August 2005.

In May 2006 the Investment Approvals Board noted the project review board’s decision to down select from six to two potential Prime Contractors: Boeing and Lockheed Martin. It was intended that each of these two companies would be invited to construct a technical demonstrator for the mission system and refine their earlier proposals for the Electronic Support Measures and communication system replacements. However, in July 2006, following an MoD financial commitment review the award of contracts for the technical demonstration phase did not take place. This resulted in the cessation of any further development by Lockheed Martin, whilst Boeing was fortunate in that it was able to continue to develop its system (known as Block 40/45) as part of a separately funded requirement for the United States Air Force.

In October 2006, the Eagle project board determined that the risks associated with the acquisition of the Boeing solution were acceptable and instructed the Eagle project team to cancel the existing competition based procurement strategy and consider the acquisition of the Eagle capability, based on the Boeing solution.

In parallel, during late 2006/early 2007 two funding options were proposed by the project sponsor; one to defer the project by four years and one for two years. The four year deferral option was later withdrawn; primarily because of the adverse affect on Defence capability and the projected cost of maintaining the increasingly obsolescent legacy systems. The two year deferral option was amended to a ‘de-scope’ option on the basis that it would be possible to change some elements of the UK requirement to take advantage of the Boeing Block 40/45 solution, being taken forward for the United States Air Force. It was considered that this was the only way in which the necessary capability could be acquired and still maintain the planned in-service date. The Defence Management Board approved an increased and revised funding profile, in January 2007, and the argument for a single source approach was contained in a Review Note approved by the Investment Approvals Board in March 2007.

During the early part of 2008 Project Eagle was included in a MoD departmental spending review programme, that resulted in the recommendation to defer the project by two years. This recommendation was upheld and approved at ministerial level in April 2008.

As a result of the deferral it has not yet been possible to determine robust planning assumption information for the cost to complete the Assessment Phase (Section 2b below), the introduction of the capability (Section 2c, below) or the costs for the Demonstration and Manufacture phase (section 2d, below) of the project.

## 2b. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 46%" />
<col style="width: 53%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>
£m (outturn prices)
</th>
<th>
Assessment Phase Cost
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Forecast Cost</td>
<td>
4<a href="fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Approved Cost at Initial Gate</td>
<td>
17
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Variation</td>
<td>
-13
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1">Only includes costs up to April 2008, the point at which the deferral option was approved.<a href="fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

## 2c. Explanation of the need and boundaries of current internal planning assumptions for introduction of the capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 48%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Earliest
</th>
<th>
Latest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope within which capability will be available</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 2d. Boundaries of current internal cost assumptions for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 48%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>
Lowest
</th>
<th>
Highest
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Envelope of costs to support Demonstration and Manufacture Phase</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK
