---
year: 2009.0
project_type: Pre-Main Investment Decision
project: Joint Military Air Traffic Services
page_from: 315.0
page_to: 317.0
project_label: Marshall
project_type_label: Assessment Phase Projects
filenm: naomprss_2009_315_317.md
---
Joint Military Air Traffic Services

PROJECT SUMMARY SHEET

Project

Joint Military Air Traffic Services

Team Responsible

Air Command and Control Systems Delivery Team

Single point of accountability for Project Capability

Director Equipment Capability ( Command, Control & Information Infrastructure)

Senior Responsible Officer

\-

Number of Projects / Increments 1

Current Status of Projects / Increments

• Pre Main Investment Decision - Joint Military Air Traffic Services

# A. Section A: The Project

## A.1. The Requirement

The Joint Military Air Traffic Services project seeks to sustain the provision of Terminal Air Traffic

Management at MOD Airfields and Air Weapons Ranges through the provision of Mode S Secondary Surveillance Radar data, addressing equipment obsolescence in the air traffic inventory and through the more efficient delivery of support services. The project will provide air traffic services to military and civilian aircraft arriving at, departing from and operating within the immediate vicinity, or confines of, MOD aerodromes (United Kingdom and overseas permanent and deployed) and at air weapons ranges.

## A.2. The Assessment Phase

The Assessment Phase of the Joint Military Air Traffic Service is being conducted in two parts. The first part (Assessment Phase 1) was approved on 17 January 2008. Its purpose is essentially to both express the provision of military air traffic services in output terms through the development of an output based specification and to determine the most appropriate and cost effective delivery solution for this service. In addition, the project is capturing data on the condition of the existing air traffic control infrastructure (control towers, radar towers, radio masts etc) as well as the number of people employed in supporting the service. This aspect of the Assessment Phase is planned to culminate in the submission of a Review Note in October 2009.

This approval is planned to initiate part two of the Assessment Phase enabling formal industry engagement. The intention is to use the Competitive Dialogue process to determine the preferred bidder and solution to deliver the services defined in the Output Based Specification within the delivery framework developed during Assessment Phase 1.

## A.3. Progress

Initial Gate Approval was obtained 17 January 2008 and Assessment Phase 1 is on track to complete on time and cost with the submission of the Review Note Industry Engagement in October 2009. This will seek the approval of an additional £6M to provide specialist technical support and external assistance to the competitive dialogue process.

## A.4. Capability Risks

Much of the equipment that currently provides air traffic services to MOD airfields and ranges is in excess of 20 years old and is obsolete. Increasing regulation of UK airspace requires the implementation of Mode S Secondary Surveillance Radar. Failure to invest in this capability will ultimately reduce the level of air traffic service provision to these locations. This will reduce the ability of all three Services to train and fly and hence the ability to project air power whenever it is required.

## A.5. Associated Projects – not applicable

## A.6. Procurement Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">Pre-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Description</td>
<td colspan="4">Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Project
</td>
<td colspan="4">
Public Private Partnership such as Strategic Partnering. Delivery partner and solution to be sought through competitive dialogue.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Assessment Phase 1
</td>
<td colspan="4">
Value for money assessment of Public Private Partnership option.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Assessment Phase 2
</td>
<td colspan="4">
Solution determination and selection of preferred bidder.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects /
Increments only</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## A.7. Support Strategy

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="5">The current planning assumption is for a full Air Traffic Management Service Provision where the provider determines and is responsible for the composition and delivery of the support element required to maintain the service, with an embedded military core to support deployed operations.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Contractor</td>
<td>
Contract Scope
</td>
<td>
Contract Type
</td>
<td>Procurement Route</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5">- - - -</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# B. Section B: Cost

## B.1. Cost of the Assessment Phase

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th rowspan="2">Description</th>
<th rowspan="2">Approved Cost (£m)</th>
<th rowspan="2">Actual /

Forecast Cost (£m)
</th>
<th rowspan="2">Variation (£m)</th>
<th colspan="2">Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>
Approved cost as a

proportion of total estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
<th>
Actual Cost as a proportion of total

estimated

procurement

expenditure (%)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase 1</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>-1</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.2. Planned/Actual Cost Boundaries for Demonstration and Manufacture Phase/PFI

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Military Air Traffic Services</td>
<td>

</td>
<td></td>
<td>

</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## B.3. Cost of the Demonstration and Manufacture (D&M) Phase – not applicable

## B.4. Unit production cost – not applicable

## B.5. Progress against approved Support/Service/PFI type arrangements Costs – not applicable

# C. Section C: Timescale

## C.1. Duration of the Assessment Phase - REST COM.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 22%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Forecast / Actual

Date of Main Gate Approval</th>
<th>Date of Initial Gate Approval</th>
<th>Length of Assessment Phase (months)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Assessment Phase</td>
<td></td>
<td>January 2008</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.2. Planned/Actual Boundaries for Introduction of Capability

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 47%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 17%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Description</th>
<th>
Lowest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
<th>
Budgeted For (Post-Main Investment Decision Projects only)
</th>
<th>
Highest Forecast /
Approved
</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Joint Military Air Traffic Services</td>
<td>

</td>
<td>
-
</td>
<td>
-
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## C.3. In Service Date - not applicable

## C.4. Initial Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.5. Full Operating Capability - not applicable

## C.6. Support / Service / PFI Contract - not applicable

# D. Section D: Performance

## D.1. Readiness Levels – not applicable

## D.2. Performance against Lines of Development – not applicable

## D.3. Performance against Key Performance Measures – not applicable
